 
 
 
 
 
                                           MODULE 4 
 
 
USER AUTHENTICATION 
 
User authentication is the fundamental component of computer security that establishes the 
identity of users before granting access to system resources. It forms the foundation for access 
control and user accountability. According to RFC 4949, user authentication is defined as the 
process of verifying an identity claimed by or for a system entity 
 
An authentication process consists of two steps: 
 
• 
Identification step: Presenting an identifier to the security system. (Identifiers 
should be assigned carefully, because authenticated identities are the basis for other 
security services, such as access control service.) 
• 
Verification step: Presenting or generating authentication information that 
corroborates the binding between the entity and the identifier.” 
In essence, identification is the means by which a user provides a claimed identity to 
the system; user authentication is the means of establishing the validity of the claim. Note 
that user authentication is distinct from message authentication. 
The NIST Model for Electronic User Authentication 
 
According to NIST SP 800-63-2, electronic authentication refers to establishing 
confidence in user identities presented electronically—typically while accessing online or 
distributed resources. This process involves several entities: 
• 
The Registration Authority (RA) verifies the applicant’s identity and vouches for it to 
Page : 1 
 

 
 
the Credential Service Provider (CSP). 
 
• 
The CSP issues an electronic credential that binds the user’s identity to an 
authentication token (such as a password, cryptographic key, or smart card). 
 
• 
The registered user becomes a subscriber, and during authentication, the subscriber 
acts as a claimant who proves identity to a verifier. 
• 
The verifier checks the claimant’s credentials and provides an assertion of verified 
identity to a relying party, which decides whether to grant access. 
 
 
 
 
There are four general means of authenticating a user's identity, which can be used 
alone or in combination: 
• Something the individual knows: Examples includes a password, a personal identification 
number (PIN), or answers to a prearranged set of questions. 
• Something the individual possesses: Examples include electronic keycards, smartcards, and 
physical keys. This type of authenticator is referred to as a token. 
• Something the individual is (static biometrics): Examples include recognition by fingerprint, 
retina, and face. 
• Something the individual does (dynamic biometrics): Examples include recognition by 
Page : 2 
 

 
 
voice pattern, handwriting characteristics, and typing rhythm. 
 
 
 
All of these methods, properly implemented and used, can provide secure user 
authentication. However, each method has problems. An adversary may be able to guess or 
steal a password. Similarly, an adversary may be able to forge or steal a token. A user may 
forget a password or lose a token. Further, there is a significant administrative overhead for 
managing password and token information on systems and securing such information on 
systems. With respect to biometric authenticators, there are a variety of problems, including 
dealing with false positives and false negatives, user acceptance, cost, and convenience. 
Authentication Protocols 
 
• An important application area is that of mutual authentication protocols. Such 
protocols enable communicating parties to satisfy themselves mutually about each 
other's identity and to exchange session keys. There, the focus was key distribution. 
• Central to the problem of authenticated key exchange are two issues: confidentiality 
and timeliness. 
• To prevent masquerade and to prevent compromise of session keys, essential 
identification and session key information must be communicated in encrypted form. The 
second issue, timeliness, is important because of the threat of message replays. 
Replay Attacks: are where a valid signed message is copied and later resent. Such replays, 
at worst, could allow an opponent to compromise a session key or successfully impersonate 
another party. At minimum, a successful replay can disrupt operations by presenting parties 
with messages that appear genuine but are not. 
Examples of replay attacks: 
 
Simple replay: The opponent simply copies a message and replays it later. 
 
Repetition that can be logged: An opponent can replay a timestamped message with in the valid 
time window. 
Repetition that cannot be detected: This situation could arise because the original message could 
have been suppressed and thus did not arrive at its destination; only there play message arrives. 
Page : 3 
 

 
 
Backward replay without modification: This is a replay back to the message sender. This attack 
is possible if symmetric encryption is used and the sender cannot easily recognize the 
difference between messages sent and messages received on the basis of content. 
Possible countermeasures include the use of: 
 
• Sequence numbers (generally impractical since must remember last number used with 
every communicating party) 
• Timestamps (needs synchronized clocks amongst all parties involved, which can be problematic) 
 
• Challenge/response (using unique, random, unpredictable nonce, but not suitable 
for connectionless applications because of handshake overhead) 
 
 
One-Way Authentication 
 
One application for which encryption is growing in popularity is electronic mail (e- 
mail). The very nature of electronic mail, and its chief benefit, is that it is not necessary for 
the sender and receiver to be online at the same time. Instead, the e-mail message is 
forwarded to the receiver’s electronic mailbox, where it is buffered until the receiver is 
available to read it. Accordingly, the e-mail message should be encrypted such that the mail- 
handling system is not in possession of the decryption key. A second requirement is that of 
authentication. Typically, the recipient wants some assurance that the message is from the 
alleged sender. 
 
REMOTE USER-AUTHENTICATION USING SYMMETRICENCRYPTION 
 
Mutual Authentication 
 
As discussed earlier, A two-level hierarchy of symmetric encryption keys can be used 
to provide confidentiality for communication in a distributed environment. Usually involves 
the use of a trusted key distribution center (KDC). Each party in the network shares a secret 
master key with the KDC. 
The KDC is responsible for generating session keys, and for distributing those keys to 
 
Page : 4 
 

 
 
the parties involved, using the master keys to protect these session keys. 
 
 
 
Needham-Schroeder Protocol 
 
The Needham-Schroeder Protocol is the original, basic key exchange protocol. Used by 
2 parties who both trusted a common key server, it gives one party the info needed to 
establish a session key with the other. 
Note that all communications is between A&KDC and A&B, B&KDC don't talk 
directly (though indirectly a message passes from KDC via A to B, encrypted in B's key so 
that A is unable to read or alter it). Other variations of key distribution protocols can 
involve direct communications between B&KDC. 
 
 
Secret keys Ka and Kb are shared between A and the KDC and B and the KDC, respectively. 
The purpose of the protocol is to distribute securely a session key Ks to A and B. 
There is a critical flaw in the protocol, as shown. The message in step 3 can be 
decrypted, and hence understood only by B. But if an opponent, X, has been able to 
compromise an old session key, then X can impersonate A and trick B into using the old key 
by simply replaying step 3. Admittedly, this is a much more unlikely occurrence than that an 
opponent has simply observed and recorded step 3. 
Denning proposes to overcome this weakness by a modification to the 
Needham/Schroeder protocol that includes the addition of a timestamp to steps 2 and 3. Her 
proposal assumes that the master keys, Ka and Kb are secure, and it consists of the 
 
following steps. 
 
 
 
Page : 5 
 

 
 
 
 
T is a timestamp that assures A and B that the session key has only just been 
generated. Thus, both A and B know that the key distribution is a fresh exchange. 
The Denning protocol seems to provide an increased degree of security compared to 
the Needham/Schroeder protocol. However, a new concern is raised: namely, that this new 
scheme requires reliance on clocks that are synchronized throughout the network. It points 
out a risk involved. The risk is based on the fact that the distributed clocks can 
become unsynchronized as a result of faults in the clocks or the synchronization mechanism. 
 
The problem occurs when a sender’s clock is ahead of the intended recipient’s 
clock. In this case, an opponent can intercept a message from the sender and replay it later 
when the timestamp in the message becomes current at the recipient’s site. This replay could 
cause unexpected results. Gong refers to such attacks as suppress-replay attacks. 
 
 
KERBEROS 
 
Kerberos is an authentication service developed as part of Project Athena at MIT, and 
is one of the best known and most widely implemented trusted third party key distribution 
systems. 
Kerberos provides a centralized authentication server whose function is to 
authenticate users to servers and servers to users. Unlike most other authentication 
schemes, Kerberos relies exclusively on symmetric encryption, making no use of public- key 
encryption. Two versions of Kerberos are in common use: v4 & v5. 
In a more open environment, in which network connections to other machines are 
supported, an approach that requires the user to prove his or her identity for each service 
invoked, and also require that servers prove their identity to clients, is needed to protect 
user information and resources housed at the server. Kerberos supports this approach, and 
assumes a distributed client/server architecture that employs one or more Kerberos servers 
Page : 6 
 

 
 
to provide an authentication service. The first published report on Kerberos[STEI88] listed 
the following requirements: 
 
• Secure: A network eavesdropper should not be able to obtain the necessary information 
to impersonate a user. 
• Reliable: For all services that rely on Kerberos for access control, lack of availability of the 
Kerberos service means lack of availability of the supported services. Hence, Kerberos 
should be highly reliable and should employ a distributed server architecture, with one 
system able to back up another. 
• Transparent: Ideally, the user should not be aware that authentication is taking place, 
beyond the requirement to enter a password. 
• Scalable: The system should be capable of supporting large numbers of clients and 
servers. This suggests a modular, distributed architecture. 
To support these requirements, Kerberos is a trusted third-party authentication 
service that uses a protocol based on that proposed by Needham and Schroeder which 
was discussed earlier in this chapter. 
 
 
The Version 4 Authentication Dialogue 
 
➢ 
Kerberos V4 is a basic third-party authentication scheme. 
 
➢ The core of Kerberos is the Authentication server (AS) and Ticket Granting 
Servers (TGS) – these are trusted by all users and servers and must be securely 
administered. 
➢ The protocol includes a sequence of interactions between the client, AS, TGT and 
desired server. Version 4 of Kerberos makes use of DES, in a rather elaborate 
protocol, to provide the authentication service 
The heart of the first problem is the lifetime associated with the ticket-granting ticket. 
If this lifetime is very short (e.g., minutes), then the user will be repeatedly asked for a 
password. If the lifetime is long (e.g., hours), then an opponent has a greater opportunity for 
Page : 7 
 

 
 
replay. Similarly, if an opponent captures a service-granting ticket and uses it before it 
expires, the opponent has access to the corresponding service. 
 
The second problem is that there may be a requirement for servers to authenticate 
themselves to users. 
First, consider the problem of captured ticket-granting tickets and the need to 
determine that the ticket presenter is the same as the client for whom the ticket was issued. 
An efficient way of doing this is to use a session encryption key to secure information. Table 
15.1a shows the technique for distributing the session key. 
 
 
 
 
Table a shows the technique for distributing the session key. As before, the client sends a 
message to the AS requesting access to the TGS. The AS responds with a message, encrypted with 
a key derived from the user’s password (Kc) that contains the ticket. The encrypted message also 
contains a copy of the session key,( Kc,tgs), where the subscripts indicate that this is a session 
key for C and TGS. Because this session key is inside the message encrypted with (Kc), only the 
Page : 8 
 

 
 
user’s client can read it. The same session key is included in the ticket, which can be read only by 
the TGS. Thus, the session key has been securely delivered to both C and the TGS. 
Note that several additional pieces of information have been added to this first phase of 
the dialogue. Message (1) includes a timestamp, so that the AS knows that the message is 
timely. Message (2) includes several elements of the ticket in a form accessible to C. This 
enables C to confirm that this ticket is for the TGS and to learn its expiration time. Note that 
the ticket does not prove anyone's identity but is a way to distribute keys securely. It is the 
authenticator that proves the client's identity. 
C sends the TGS a message that includes the ticket plus the ID of the requested service 
(message (3) in Table b). In addition, C transmits an authenticator, which includes the ID and 
address of C’s user and a timestamp. Unlike the ticket, which is reusable, the authenticator is 
intended for use only once and has a very short lifetime. The TGS can decrypt the ticket with 
the key that it shares with the AS. This ticket indicates that user C has been provided with the 
session key Kc,tgs. In effect, the ticket says,“Anyone who uses Kc,tgs must be C.” The TGS uses 
the session key to decrypt the authenticator. 
The reply from the TGS, in message (4), follows the form of message (2). C now has a 
reusable service-granting ticket for V. When C presents this ticket, as shown in message (5), 
it also sends an authenticator. The server can decrypt the ticket, recover the session key, and 
decrypt the authenticator. If mutual authentication is required, the server can reply as shown 
in message (6). 
Finally, at the conclusion of this process, the client and server share a secret key. This 
key can be used to encrypt future messages between the two or to exchange a new random 
session key for that purpose. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page : 9 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page : 10 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
KERBEROS REALMS: 
 
A full-service Kerberos environment consisting of a Kerberos server, a number of 
clients, and a number of application servers requires the following: 
1. The Kerberos server must have the user ID and hashed passwords of all participating 
users in its database. All users are registered with the Kerberos server. 
 
Page : 11 
 

 
 
2. The Kerberos server must share a secret key with each server. All servers are registered 
with the Kerberos server. 
3.  The Kerberos server in each interoperating realm shares a secret key with the server 
in the other realm. The two Kerberos servers are registered with each other. 
A full-service Kerberos environment consisting of a Kerberos server, a number of 
 
clients, and a number of application servers is referred to as a Kerberos realm. A Kerberos 
realm is a set of managed nodes that share the same Kerberos database, and are part of the 
same administrative domain. If have multiple realms, their Kerberos servers must share keys 
and trust each other. 
 
The details of the exchanges illustrated in below Figure are as follows 
 
 
 
 
 
Page : 12 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page : 13 
 

 
 
The Version 5 Authentication Dialogue 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page : 14 
 

Module 4 
 
 
• Message (1) is a client request for a ticket-granting ticket. As before, it includes the ID of the 
user and the TGS. The following new elements are added: 
• Realm: Indicates realm of user 
• Options: Used to request that certain flags be set in the returned ticket 
• Times: Used by the client to request the following time settings in the ticket: 
—from: the desired start time for the requested ticket 
—till: the requested expiration time for the requested ticket 
—rtime: requested renew-till time 
• Nonce: A random value to be repeated in message (2) to assure that the response is fresh 
and has not been replayed by an opponent. 
• Message (2) returns a ticket-granting ticket, identifying information for the client, and a 
block encrypted using the encryption key based on the user’s password. This block includes 
the session key to be used between the client and the TGS, times specified in message (1), 
the nonce from message (1), and TGS identifying information. The ticket itself includes the 
session key, identifying information for the client, the requested time values, and flags that 
reflect the status of this ticket and the requested options. These flags introduce significant 
new functionality to version 5. 
• Message (3) for both versions includes an authenticator, a ticket, and the name of the 
requested service. In addition, version 5 includes requested times and options for the ticket 
and a nonce— all with functions similar to those of message 1). 
• Message (4) has the same structure as message (2). It returns a ticket plus information 
needed by the client, with the information encrypted using the session key now shared by 
the client and the TGS. 
• Finally, for the client/server authentication exchange, several new features appear in version 
5. In message (5), the client may request as an option that mutual authentication is required. 
The authenticator includes several new fields: 
• Subkey: The client’s choice for an encryption key to be used to protect this specific 
application session. If this field is omitted, the session key from the ticket (Kc,v) is used. 
• Sequence number: An optional field that specifies the starting sequence number to be 
used by the server for messages sent to the client during this session. Messages may be 
sequence numbered to detect replays. 
Page : 15 
 

Module 4 
 
 
 
DIFFERENCES BETWEEN VERSIONS 4 AND 5 
Version 5 is intended to address the limitations of version 4 in two areas: environmental 
shortcomings and technical deficiencies. 
Environmental shortcomings. 
 
1. Encryption system dependence: Version 4 requires the use of DES. Export restriction on 
DES as well as doubts about the strength of DES were thus of concern. In version 5, ciphertext 
is tagged with an encryption-type identifier so that any encryption technique may be used. 
2. Internet protocol dependence: Version 4 requires the use of Internet Protocol (IP) 
addresses. Other address types, such as the ISO network address, are not accommodated. 
Version 5 network addresses are tagged with type and length, allowing any network address 
type to be used. 
3. Message byte ordering: In version 4, the sender of a message employs a byte ordering of 
its own choosing and tags the message to indicate least significant byte in lowest address or 
most significant byte in lowest address. This technique works but does not follow established 
conventions. In version 5, all message structures are defined using Abstract Syntax Notation 
One (ASN.1) and Basic Encoding Rules (BER), which provide an unambiguous byte ordering. 
4. Ticket lifetime: Lifetime values in version 4 are encoded in an 8-bit quantity in units of 
five minutes. Thus, the maximum lifetime that can be expressed is 28 * 5 = 1280 minutes (a 
little over 21 hours).This may be inadequate for some applications. In version 5, tickets 
include an explicit start time and end time, allowing tickets with arbitrary lifetimes. 
5. Authentication forwarding: Version 4 does not allow credentials issued to one client to 
be forwarded to some other host and used by some other client. This capability would enable 
a client to access a server and have that server access another server on behalf of the client. 
For example, a client issues a request to a print server that then accesses the client’s file from 
a file server, using the client’s credentials for access. Version 5 provides this capability. 
6. Interrealm authentication: In version 4, interoperability among N realms requires on the 
order of N2 Kerberos-to-Kerberos relationships, as described earlier. Version 5 supports a 
method that requires fewer relationships, as described shortly. 
Page : 16 
 

Module 4 
 
 
 
 
 
Technical deficiencies: 
1. Double encryption: Note in Table 15.1 [messages (2) and (4)] that tickets provided to 
clients are encrypted twice - once with the secret key of the target server and then again with 
a secret key known to the client. The second encryption is not necessary and is 
computationally wasteful. 
2. PCBC encryption: Encryption in version 4 makes use of a nonstandard mode of DES 
known as propagating cipher block chaining (PCBC).It has been demonstrated that this mode 
is vulnerable to an attack involving the interchange of ciphertext blocks. Version 5 provides 
explicit integrity mechanisms, a checksum or hash code is attached to the message prior to 
encryption using CBC. 
3. Session keys: Each ticket includes a session key that is used by the client to encrypt the 
authenticator sent to the service associated with that ticket. In addition, the session key may 
subsequently be used by the client and the server to protect messages passed during that 
session. However, because the same ticket may be used repeatedly to gain service from a 
particular server, there is the risk that an opponent will replay messages from an old session 
to the client or the server. In version 5, it is possible for a client and server to negotiate a sub 
session key, which is to be used only for that one connection. 
4. Password attacks: Both versions are vulnerable to a password attack. The message from 
the AS to the client includes material encrypted with a key based on the client’s password. 
An opponent can capture this message and attempt to decrypt it by trying various passwords. 
If the result of a test decryption is of the proper form, then the opponent has discovered the 
client’s password and may subsequently use it to gain authentication credentials from 
Kerberos. Version 5 does provide a mechanism known as pre authentication, which should 
make password attacks more difficult, but it does not prevent them. 
 
REMOTE USER AUTHENTICATION USING ASYMMETRICENCRYPTION 
 
Mutual Authentication 
 
Page : 17 
 

Module 4 
 
This protocol assumes that each of the two parties is in possession of the current 
public key of the other. It may not be practical to require this assumption. 
 
 
 
 
A protocol using timestamps is provided in that uses a central system, referred to as 
an authentication server (AS), because it is not actually responsible for secret key 
distribution. Rather, the AS provides public-key certificates. The session key is chosen and 
encrypted by A; hence, there is no risk of exposure by the AS. The timestampsprotect against 
replays of compromised keys. See text for details. This protocol is compact but, as before, 
requires synchronization of clocks. Another approach, proposed by Woo and Lam, makes use 
of nonces. 
 
 
 
Note the authors themselves spotted a flaw in it and submitted a revised version of 
the algorithm in. In both this example and the protocols described earlier, protocols that 
appeared secure were revised after additional analysis. These examples highlight the 
difficulty of getting things right in the area of authentication. 
One-Way Authentication 
 
We have already presented public-key encryption approaches that are suited to 
 
Page : 18 
 

Module 4 
 
electronic mail, including the straightforward encryption of the entire message for 
 
confidentiality, authentication, or both. These approaches require that either the sender 
know the recipient's public key (confidentiality) or the recipient know the sender's public 
key (authentication) or both (confidentiality plus authentication). 
If confidentiality is the primary concern, then better to encrypt the message with a 
one-time secret key, and also encrypt this one-time key with B's public key. If authentication 
is the primary concern, then a digital signature may suffice (but could be replaced by an 
opponent). To counter such a scheme, both the message and signature can be encrypted with 
the recipient's public key. The latter two schemes require that B know A's public key and be 
convinced that it is timely. An effective way to provide this assurance is the digital certificate. 
Web Security Consideration 
Web Security Overview 
 
The World Wide Web (WWW) is primarily a client/server application running over the Internet 
and TCP/IP-based intranets. While general Internet security tools apply to Web environments, the 
unique characteristics of Web usage require specialized security mechanisms. 
Although Web browsers are simple to use and Web servers easy to configure, the underlying 
software is highly complex, often hiding security vulnerabilities. Many newly installed systems 
have been found vulnerable to attacks despite being properly set up. 
A compromised Web server can act as a launching pad for attackers to infiltrate the entire 
organizational network, accessing data and systems beyond the Web domain. Furthermore, casual 
or untrained users commonly access Web services without awareness of security risks, making 
them easy targets. 
Web Security Threats 
 
(Table 17.1) summarizes the major Web security threats, which can be grouped as follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page : 19 
 

Module 4 
 
 
 
 
 
• 
Passive attacks: 
o Eavesdropping on network traffic between browser and server. 
o Unauthorized access to restricted Web information. 
• 
Active attacks: 
o Impersonation of legitimate users. 
o Modification of messages during transmission. 
o Alteration of Web content on the server. 
 
Threats can also be classified based on where they occur: 
 
• 
Web server threats 
• 
Web browser threats 
• 
Network traffic threats 
 
The first two categories relate to computer system security, while traffic security falls under 
network security, discussed in this chapter. 
 
 
 
Web Traffic Security Approaches 
 
Several approaches exist to secure Web traffic, differing mainly by their placement in the TCP/IP 
stack and scope of protection (Figure 17.1). 
 
Page : 20 
 

Module 4 
 
 
 
 
1. Using IP Security (IPsec) — Figure 17.1(a): 
o Operates at the network layer. 
o Transparent to users and applications. 
o Provides a general-purpose solution. 
o Includes filtering so only selected traffic is processed, reducing overhead. 
2. Using Security Above TCP — Figure 17.1(b): 
o Example: Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) and Transport Layer Security (TLS). 
o Can be implemented as: 
▪ 
A protocol-level service (transparent to applications). 
▪ 
Embedded within specific applications (e.g., browsers and servers). 
o Provides encryption, authentication, and data integrity. 
3. Application-Specific Security — Figure 17.1(c): 
o Security features are built directly into the application. 
o Enables customized protection tailored to the application's needs. 
 
 
 
Transport Layer Security (TLS) 
 
Transport Layer Security (TLS) 
One of the most widely used security services is Transport Layer Security (TLS), currently at Version 
1.2 (RFC 5246). TLS evolved from Secure Sockets Layer (SSL), which is now deprecated. TLS operates 
over TCP and can either be embedded in applications (like browsers and web servers) or provided as 
a transparent layer in the protocol stack. 
TLS Architecture 
TLS consists of two layers: 
1. TLS Record Protocol – Provides basic confidentiality and message integrity to higher-layer 
protocols like HTTP. 
2. TLS-specific protocols – 
o Handshake Protocol 
o Change Cipher Spec Protocol 
o Alert Protocol 
o Heartbeat Protocol (RFC 6250) 
Key Concepts: 
• 
Connection: A transient, peer-to-peer relationship providing transport services. Each 
connection is associated with one session. 
Page : 21 
 

Module 4 
 
• 
Session: An association between client and server that defines shared cryptographic 
parameters, avoiding repeated negotiation. 
Session State: 
• 
Session ID, Peer certificate, Compression method, Cipher spec, Master secret, Is resumable 
Connection State: 
• 
Server/client random, MAC secrets, write keys, IVs, sequence numbers 
 
TLS Record Protocol 
The Record Protocol provides confidentiality and message integrity: 
1. Fragmentation: Messages split into blocks ≤16,384 bytes. 
2. Compression: Optional, lossless. 
 
3. MAC computation: Uses HMAC (MD5/SHA-1). 
4. Encryption: Symmetric algorithms (AES, 3DES, RC4). 
o Stream ciphers encrypt compressed message + MAC 
o Block ciphers may include padding to match block length 
5. Header prepending: Content Type, Major/Minor Version, Compressed Length 
6. Content types: change_cipher_spec, alert, handshake, application_data (see Figure 17.4) 
 
 
 
 
Page : 22 
 

Module 4 
 
 
 
 
TLS-specific Protocols 
1. Change Cipher Spec Protocol: 
• 
Single-byte message (value 1) updates pending state to current state. 
2. Alert Protocol: 
• 
Two-byte messages indicating severity (warning or fatal) and alert code. 
• 
Fatal alerts terminate the connection immediately (e.g., bad_record_mac, handshake_failure). 
• 
Warnings include close_notify, bad_certificate, etc. (Figure 17.5b). 
 
3. Handshake Protocol: 
• 
Authenticates client and server, negotiates encryption & MAC algorithms. 
• 
Messages have Type (1 byte), Length (3 bytes), Content (see Table 17.2). 
Page : 23 
 

Module 4 
 
• 
Four phases (Figure 17.6): 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Establish Security Capabilities: client_hello and server_hello exchanged. Includes 
version, random, session ID, CipherSuite, compression methods. 
2. Server Authentication & Key Exchange: Server sends certificate, server_key_exchange, 
optional 
certificate 
request, 
and 
server_done. 
Supports 
RSA, 
Fixed/Ephemeral/Anonymous Diffie-Hellman. 
3. Client Authentication & Key Exchange: Client sends certificate (if requested), 
client_key_exchange, and optional certificate_verify. 
4. Finish: change_cipher_spec and finished messages confirm successful handshake. 
 
Cryptographic Computations 
Master Secret Creation: 
• 
Shared 48-byte value computed using pre_master_secret via RSA or Diffie-Hellman. 
• 
master_secret 
= 
PRF(pre_master_secret, 
“master 
secret”, 
ClientHello.random 
|| 
Page : 24 
 

Module 4 
 
ServerHello.random) 
Generation of Cryptographic Parameters: 
• 
Keys (MAC, encryption) and IVs derived from master_secret using PRF. 
Pseudorandom Function (PRF): 
• 
Expands secrets into secure blocks for key generation/validation. 
• 
PRF(secret, label, seed) = P_hash(secret, label || seed) using iterative HMAC (MD5/SHA-1). 
 
Heartbeat Protocol (RFC 6250) 
• 
Monitors availability and keeps TLS connections alive during idle periods. 
• 
Messages: heartbeat request and heartbeat response. 
• 
Payload between 16 bytes and 64 KB; echoed in response. 
 
SSL/TLS Attacks 
Categories: 
1. Handshake protocol attacks: Exploit RSA formatting or implementation flaws. 
2. Record/application data attacks: E.g., BEAST and CRIME attacks. 
3. PKI attacks: Exploit certificate validation weaknesses. 
4. Other attacks: DoS attacks exploiting TLS handshake computation. 
TLSv1.3 Enhancements 
• 
Removes unnecessary functions (compression, static RSA/DH, RC4, MD5/SHA-224). 
• 
Uses Diffie-Hellman/Elliptic Curve DH for key exchange; RSA not permitted. 
• 
Supports 1-round trip handshake, improving efficiency and reducing attack surface. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page : 25 
 

Cryptography -Module -4 
 
 
 
ELECTRONIC MAIL SECURITY 
 
➢ In virtually all distributed environments, electronic mail is the most heavily 
used network-based application. 
➢ Users expect to be able to, and do, send e-mail to others who are connected 
directly or indirectly to the Internet, regardless of host operating system or 
communications suite. 
 
Pretty Good Privacy 
✓ PGP is an open-source, freely available software package for e-mail security. 
✓ It provides authentication through the use of digital signature, confidentiality 
through the use of symmetric block encryption, compression using the ZIP 
algorithm, and e- mail compatibility using the radix-64 encoding scheme. 
✓ PGP was developed by Phil Zimmermann. 
✓ Zimmermann has done the following: 
1. Selected the best available cryptographic algorithms as building blocks. 
2. Integrated these algorithms into a general-purpose application that is 
independent of operating system and processor and that is based on a small set of 
easy-to-use commands. 
3. Made the package and its documentation, including the source code, freely 
available via the Internet, bulletin boards, and commercial networks such as AOL 
(America On Line). 
4. Entered into an agreement with a company (Via crypt, now Network 
Associates) to provide a fully compatible, low-cost commercial version of PGP. 
 
PGP has grown explosively and is now widely used because of following reasons: 
1. It is available free worldwide in versions that run on a variety of platforms, 
including Windows, UNIX, Macintosh, and many more. 
2. It is based on algorithms that are considered extremely secure such as RSA, DSS, 
and Diffie-Hellman for public-key encryption; CAST-128, IDEA, and 3DES for 
symmetric encryption; and SHA-1 for hash coding. 
3. It has a wide range of applicability, from corporations that wish to select and 
enforce a standardized scheme for encrypting files and messages to individuals 
who wish to communicate securely with others worldwide over the Internet and 
other networks. 
4. It was not developed by, nor is it controlled by, any governmental or standards 
organization. 
5. PGP is now on an Internet standards track (RFC 3156; MIME Security withOpenPGP). 
 
 
Page 26 
 

Cryptography -Module -4 
 
Notations 
 
KS 
: 
Session key used in Symmetric Encryption Scheme 
PRa 
: 
Private key of User A, used in Public Encryption 
Scheme PUa : Public key of User A, used in Public Encryption 
Scheme EP 
: 
Public Encryption 
DP 
: 
Public Decryption 
EC 
: 
Symmetric 
Encryption DC 
: 
Symmetric 
Decryption 
H 
: Hash Function 
|| 
: 
Concatenation 
Z 
: 
Compression 
R64 
: 
Radix 64 conversion 
 
Operational Description 
The actual operation of PGP consists of five series: 
• Authentication 
• Confidentiality 
• Compression 
• E-mail compatibility 
• Segmentation 
 
 
1. Authentication 
 
 
Authentication 
 
✓ It is provided through the digital signatures. The sequence is as follows 
1. The sender creates a message. 
2. SHA-1 is used to generate a 160-bit hash code of the message. 
3. The hash code is encrypted with RSA using the sender’s private key, and 
the result is prepended to the message. 
4. The receiver uses RSA with the sender’s public key to decrypt and recover 
the hash code. 
Page 27 
 

Cryptography -Module -4 
 
5. The receiver generates a new hash code for the message and compares it 
with the decrypted hash code. If the two match, the message is accepted 
as authentic. 
 
✓ The combination of SHA-1 and RSA provides an effective digital signature scheme. 
✓ Because of the strength of RSA, the recipient is assured that only the possessor of 
the matching private key can generate the signature. 
✓ Because of the strength of SHA-1, the recipient is assured that no one else could 
generate a new message that matches the hash code and, hence, the signature 
of the original message 
✓ Detached signatures are supported. A detached signature may be stored 
and transmitted separately from the message it signs. 
✓ Finally, detached signatures can be used when more than one party must 
sign a document, such as a legal contract. 
 
2. Confidentiality 
It is provided by encrypting messages to be transmitted or to be stored locally as files. The 
sequence can be described as follows. 
1. The sender generates a message and a random 128-bit number to be used as a 
session key for this message only. 
2. The message is encrypted using CAST-128 (or IDEA or 3DES) with the session key. 
3. The session key is encrypted with RSA using the recipient’s public key 
and is prepended to the message. 
4. The receiver uses RSA with its private key to decrypt and recover the session key. 
5. The session key is used to decrypt the message. 
 
 
Confidentiality 
 
✓ Instead of using the RSA also Diffie Hellman can be used. 
✓ Diffie- Hellman is a key exchange algorithm. 
✓ In 
fact, 
PGP 
uses 
a 
variant 
of 
Diffie-Hellman 
that 
does 
provide 
encryption/decryption, known as ElGamal. 
 
 
Page 28 
 
 

Cryptography -Module -4 
 
 
 
3. Confidentiality and Authentication 
1. Here both services(Confidentiality and Authentication)may be used for the 
same message. 
2. First, a signature is generated for the plaintext message and prepended 
to the message. 
3. Then the plaintext message plus signature is encrypted using CAST-128 
(or IDEA or 3DES), and the session key is encrypted using RSA (or 
ElGamal). 
 
 
Confidentiality and Authentication 
 
4. Compression 
✓ PGP compresses the message after applying the signature 
but before encryption . 
✓ The signature is generated before compression for two reasons: 
✓ It is preferable to sign an uncompressed message so that one can store 
only the uncompressed message together with the signature for future 
verification. 
✓ If one signed a compressed document, then it would be necessary either 
to store a compressed version of the message for later verification or to 
recompress the message when verification is required. 
✓ However, these different compression algorithms are interoperable 
because any version of the algorithm can correctly decompress the output 
of any other version. 
✓ Applying the hash function and signature after compression would 
constrain all PGP implementations to the same version of the 
compression algorithm. 
 
Page 29 
 

Cryptography -Module -4 
 
✓ Message encryption is applied after compression to strengthen 
cryptographic security. Because the compressed message has less 
redundancy than the original plaintext, cryptanalysis is more difficult. 
The compression algorithm used is ZIP 
 
 
 
5. Email Compatibility 
1. When PGP is used, at least part of the block to be transmitted is encrypted. 
2. If only the signature service is used, then the message digest(hash 
code) is encrypted (with the sender’s private key). 
3. If the confidentiality service is used, the message plus signature (if 
present) are encrypted (with a one-time symmetric key). Thus, part 
or the entire resulting block consists of a stream of arbitrary 8-bit 
octets. 
4. PGP provides the service of converting the raw 8-bit binary stream 
to a stream of printable ASCII characters. 
5. The scheme used for this purpose is radix-64 conversion. 
6. Each group of three octets of binary data is mapped into four ASCII 
characters. 
7. The use of radix 64 expands a message by 33%. 
8. Each group of three octets of binary data is mapped into four ASCII 
characters. 
 
6. Segmentation and Reassembly 
1. Email facilities are often restricted to a maximum message length. 
2. To accommodate this restriction, the PGP subdivides the message that is too 
large into segments that are small enough to send via email. 
3. Thus the session key component, and signature component appear only once 
at the beginning of the first segment. 
4. At the receiving end, PGP strips off all email headers and reassemble the entire 
original block of data. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 30 
 

Cryptography -Module -4 
 
The below Figure shows the relationship among the four services 
 
 
Transmission and Reception of PGP Message 
Transmission 
✓ On transmission (if it is required), a signature is generated using a hash code of 
the uncompressed plaintext. 
✓ Then the plaintext (plus signature if present) is compressed. 
✓ Next, if confidentiality is required, the block (compressed plaintext or compressed 
signature plus plaintext) is encrypted and prepended with the public-key 
encrypted symmetric encryption key. 
✓ Finally, the entire block is converted to radix-64 format. 
Reception 
✓ On reception, the incoming block is first converted back from radix-64 format to binary. 
✓ Then, if the message is encrypted, the recipient recovers the session key and 
decrypts the message. 
✓ The resulting block is then decompressed. 
✓ If the message is signed, the recipient recovers the transmitted hash code and 
compares it to its own calculation of the hash code. 
 
 
 
Page 31 
 

Cryptography -Module -4 
 
 
 
S/MIME (Security/Multipurpose Internet Mail Extension) 
 
S/MIME is very similar to PGP. Both offer the ability to sign and/or encrypt 
messages. 
✓ S/MIME (Secure/Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions) is a security 
enhancement to the MIME internet e-mail format standard, based on RSA data 
security. 
✓ S/MIME provides the following cryptographic security services for 
electronic messaging applications: 
➢ Authentication 
➢ Message integrity 
➢ Non-repudiation of origin using digital signatures 
➢ Data confidentiality using encryption 
RFC 822 
✓ RFC 822 defines a format for text messages that are sent using electronic mail. It 
has been the standard for Internet-based text mail messages and remains in 
common use. 
✓ In the RFC 822 context, messages are viewed as having an envelope and contents. 
✓ The envelope contains whatever information is needed to accomplish 
transmission and delivery. 
✓ The overall structure of a message that conforms to RFC 822 is very simple. 
✓ A message consists of some number of header lines (the header) followed by 
unrestricted text (the body). The header is separated from the body by a blank 
line 
✓ A header line consists of a keyword, followed by a colon, followed by the 
keyword’s arguments; the format allows a long line to be broken up into several 
lines. 
✓ The most frequently used keywords are From, To, Subject, and Date. Here is 
an example message. 
 
Example: 
 
 
Page 32 
 
Date: October 8, 2009 2:15:49 PM EDT 
From: William Stallings <ws@shore.net> 
Subject: The Syntax in RFC822 
To: Smith@Other-host.com 
Cc: Jones@Yet-Another-Host.com 
Hello. This section begins the actual message body, which is delimited 
from the message heading by a blank line. 

Cryptography -Module -4 
 
Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions (MIME) 
✓ Multipurpose Internet Mail Extension (MIME) is an extension to the RFC 822 
framework that is intended to address some of the problems and limitations of 
the use of Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP). 
✓ They are 
1. SMTP cannot transmit executable files or other binary objects. A number of 
schemes are in use for converting binary files into a text form that can be used by 
SMTP mail systems, including the popular UNIX UUencode/Uudecode scheme. 
However, none of these is a standard or even a de facto standard. 
2. SMTP cannot transmit text data that includes national language characters, 
because these are represented by 8-bit codes with values of 128 decimal or higher, 
and SMTP is limited to 7-bit ASCII. 
3. SMTP servers may reject mail message over a certain size. 
4. SMTP gateways that translate between ASCII and the character code EBCDIC do 
not use a consistent set of mappings, resulting in translation problems. 
5. SMTP gateways to X.400 electronic mail networks cannot handle non textual 
data included in X.400 messages. 
6. Some SMTP implementations do not adhere completely to the SMTP standards 
defined in RFC 821 
 
✓ Common problems include: 
• Deletion, addition, or reordering of carriage return and linefeed 
• Truncating or wrapping lines longer than 76 characters 
• Removal of trailing white space (tab and space characters) 
• Padding of lines in a message to the same length 
• Conversion of tab characters into multiple space characters. 
 
OVERVIEW 
The MIME specification includes the following elements 
1. Five new message header fields are defined, which may be included in an RFC 822 
header. These fields provide information about the body of the message. 
2. A number of content formats are defined, thus standardizing representations that 
support multimedia electronic mail. 
3. Transfer encodings are defined that enable the conversion of any content format into a 
form that is protected from alteration by the mail system. 
 
(Explain the header fields of MIME protocol…) 
The five header fields defined in MIME are 
• MIME-Version: Must have the parameter value 1.0. This field indicates that the 
message conforms to RFCs 2045 and 2046. 
Page 33 
 

Cryptography -Module -4 
 
• Content-Type: Describes the data contained in the body with sufficient detail that 
the receiving user agent can pick an appropriate agent or mechanism to represent 
the data to the user or otherwise deal with the data in an appropriate manner. 
 
• Content-Transfer-Encoding: Indicates the type of transformation that has been 
used to represent the body of the message in a way that is acceptable for mail 
transport. 
• Content-ID: Used to identify MIME entities uniquely in multiple contexts. 
• Content-Description: A text description of the object with the body; this is 
useful when the object is not readable (e.g., audio data). 
 
(Explain 
MIME Content types ? 
) 
MIME CONTENT TYPES: 
✓ The bulk of the MIME specification is concerned with the definition of a variety of 
content types. 
✓ There are seven different major types of content and a total of 15 subtypes. In 
general, a content type declares the general type of data, and the subtype specifies 
a particular format for that type of data. 
✓ For the text type of body, no special software is required to get the full meaning of 
the text aside from support of the indicated character set. 
✓ The primary subtype is plain text, which is simply a string of ASCII characters or 
ISO 8859 characters. The enriched subtype allows greater formatting flexibility. 
✓ The multipart type indicates that the body contains multiple, independent parts. 
✓ The Content-Type header field includes a parameter (called a boundary) that 
defines the delimiter between body parts. 
✓ Each boundary starts on a new line and consists of two hyphens followed by the 
boundary value. The final boundary, which indicates the end of the last part, also 
has a suffix of two hyphens. 
✓ Within each part, there may be an optional ordinary MIME header. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 34 
 

Cryptography -Module -4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 35 
 
Example: 
From: Nathaniel Borenstein <nsb@bellcore.com> 
To: Ned Freed <ned@innosoft.com> 
Subject: Sample message 
MIME-Version: 1.0 
Content-type: multipart/mixed; boundary="simple 
boundary" 
This is the preamble. It is to be ignored, though it is a handy place for mail composers to 
include an explanatory note to non-MIME conformant readers. 
—simple boundary 
This is implicitly typed plain ASCII text. It does NOT end with a line break. 
—simple boundary 
Content-type: text/plain; charset=us-ascii 
This is explicitly typed plain ASCII text. It DOES end with a linebreak. 
—simple boundary— 

Cryptography -Module -4 
 
 
 
 
✓ There are four subtypes of the multipart type, all of which have the same 
overall syntax. 
1. The multipart/mixed subtype is used when there are multiple independent 
body parts that need to be bundled in a particular order. 
2. The multipart/parallel subtype, the order of the parts is not significant. 
If the recipient’s system is appropriate, the multiple parts can be presented 
in parallel. 
3. For the multipart/alternative subtype, the various parts are different 
representations of the same information. 
4. The multipart/digest subtype is used when each of the body parts is interpreted 
as an RFC 822 message with headers. This subtype enables the construction of a 
message whose parts are individual messages. 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 36 
 

Cryptography -Module -4 
 
Example of multipart/alternative subtype: 
From: Nathaniel Borenstein <nsb@bellcore.com> 
To: Ned Freed <ned@innosoft.com> 
Subject: Formatted text mail 
MIME-Version: 1.0 
Content-Type: multipart/alternative; 
boundary=boundary42 
—boundary42 
Content-Type: text/plain; charset=us-ascii 
...plain text version of message goes here.... 
—boundary42 
Content-Type: text/enriched 
.... RFC 1896 text/enriched version of same message 
goes here ... 
—boundary42— 
 
There are three sub types in message type in MIME. 
1. The message/rfc822 subtype: indicates that the body is an entire message, 
 
including header and body. 
2. The message/partial subtype enables fragmentation of a large message into a 
number of parts, which must be reassembled at the destination. For this subtype, 
three parameters are specified in the Content-Type: Message/Partial field: an id 
common to all fragments of the same message, a sequence number unique to each 
fragment, and the total number of fragments. 
3. The message/external-body subtype: indicates that the actual data to be 
conveyed in this message are not contained in the body. Instead, the body contains 
the information needed to access the data 
 
✓ The application type refers to other kinds of data, typically either uninterpreted 
binary data or information to be processed by a mail-based application. The 
quoted-printable transfer encoding is useful when the data consists largely of 
octets that correspond to printable ASCII characters. 
 
(Explain MIME Transfer Encodings ? ) 
MIME TRANSFER ENCODINGS 
✓ The other major component of the MIME specification, in addition to content type 
specification, is a definition of transfer encodings for message bodies. 
✓ The Content-Transfer-Encoding field can actually take on six values, as listed in 
below Table However, three of these values (7bit, 8bit, and binary) indicate that no 
encoding has been done but provide some information about the nature of the 
data. 
Page 37 
 

Cryptography -Module -4 
 
✓ For SMTP transfer, it is safe to use the 7bit form. 
✓ The 8bit and binary forms may be usable in other mail transport contexts. 
✓ x-token Encoding , which indicates that some other encoding scheme is used for 
which a name is to be supplied. This could be a vendor-specific or application-specific 
scheme. 
✓ The two actual encoding schemes defined are quoted-printable and base64. 
✓ Two schemes are defined to provide a choice between a transfer technique that 
is essentially human readable and one that is safe for all types of data in a way 
that is reasonably compact. 
✓ The quoted-printable transfer encoding is useful when the data consists largely 
of octets that correspond to printable ASCII characters. 
✓ In essence, it represents nonsafe characters by the hexadecimal representation of 
their code and introduces reversible (soft) line breaks to limit message lines to 76 
characters. 
✓ The base64 transfer encoding, also known as radix-64 encoding, is a common 
one for encoding arbitrary binary data in such a way as to be invulnerable to the 
processing by mail- transport programs. 
 
 
 
S/MIME Functionality: 
In terms of general functionality, S/MIME is very similar to PGP. Both offer the ability to 
sign and/or encrypt messages. In this subsection, we briefly summarize S/MIME 
capability. 
 
FUNCTIONS S/MIME provides the following functions. 
• Enveloped data: This consists of encrypted content of any type and 
encrypted content encryption keys for one or more recipients. 
• Signed data: A digital signature is formed by taking the message digest of the content 
 
Page 38 
 

Cryptography -Module -4 
 
 
to be signed and then encrypting that with the private key of the signer. The 
content plus signature are then encoded using base64 encoding. A signed data 
message can only be viewed by a recipient with S/MIME capability. 
• Clear-signed data: As with signed data, a digital signature of the content is 
formed. However, in this case, only the digital signature is encoded using 
base64.As a result, recipients without S/MIME capability can view the message 
content, although they cannot verify the signature. 
• Signed and enveloped data: Signed-only and encrypted-only entities may be 
nested, so that encrypted data may be signed and signed data or clear-signed data 
may be encrypted. 
 
 
CRYPTOGRAPHIC ALGORITHM 
• S/MIME uses the following terminology to specify requirement level: 
MUST: The definition is an absolute requirement of the specification. An 
implementation must include this feature or function to be in conformance with the 
specification. 
SHOULD: There may exist valid reasons in particular circumstances to ignore this feature 
or function, but it is recommended that an implementation include the feature or function. 
• S/MIME incorporates three public-key algorithms. 
➢ The Digital Signature Standard (DSS) is the preferred algorithm for 
digital signature. 
➢ S/MIME lists Diffie-Hellman as the preferred algorithm for encrypting 
session keys 
➢ RSA, can be used for both signatures and session key encryption. 
 
Page 39 
 

Cryptography -Module -4 
 
 
• For the hash function used to create the digital signature, the specification 
requires the 160-bit SHA-1 but recommends receiver support for the 128-bit MD5 
for backward compatibility with older versions of S/MIME. 
• For message encryption, three-key triple DES (tripleDES) is recommended, but 
compliant implementations must support 40-bit RC2. 
• The following rules, in the following order, should be followed by a sending agent. 
1. If the sending agent has a list of preferred decrypting capabilities from an 
intended recipient, it SHOULD choose the first (highest preference) capability 
on the list that it is capable of using. 
2. If the sending agent has no such list of capabilities from an intended recipient 
but has received one or more messages from the recipient, then the outgoing 
message SHOULD use the same encryption algorithm as was used on the last 
signed and encrypted message received from that intended recipient. 
3. If the sending agent has no knowledge about the decryption capabilities of 
the intended recipient and is willing to risk that the recipient may not be able to 
decrypt the message, then the sending agent SHOULD use triple DES. 
4. If the sending agent has no knowledge about the decryption capabilities of 
the intended recipient and is not willing to risk that the recipient may not be 
able to decrypt the message, then the sending agent MUST use RC2/40. 
 
S/MIME Messages 
(Explain S/MIME content types) 
 
✓ S/MIME makes use of a number of new MIME content types shown in table. 
✓ All of the new application types use the designation PKCS. This refers to a set of 
public- key cryptography specifications issued by RSA Laboratories. 
 
Securing a MIME entity: 
✓ S/MIME secures a MIME entity with a signature encryption, or both. A MIME 
Page 40 
 

Cryptography -Module -4 
 
entity may be an entire message , or if the MIME content type is multipart, then a 
MIME entity is one or more of the subparts of the message. 
✓ Then the MIME entity plus some security-related data, such as algorithm 
identifiers and certificates, are processed by S/MIME to produce what is known as 
a PKCS object. 
✓ A PKCS object is then treated as message content and wrapped in MIME. In all 
cases, the message to be sent is converted to canonical form. 
 
Enveloped Data 
✓ An application/pkcs7-mime subtype is used for one of four categories of S/MIME 
processing, each with a unique s/mime-type parameter. 
✓ The steps for preparing an enveloped Data MIME entity are: 
1. Generate a pseudorandom session key for a particular symmetric encryption 
algorithm (RC2/40 or triple DES). 
2. For each recipient, encrypt the session key with the recipient’s public RSA key. 
3. For each recipient, prepare a block known as Recipient Info that contains an identifier 
of the recipient’s public-key certificate, an identifier of the algorithm used to encrypt the 
session key, and the encrypted session key. 
4. Encrypt the message content with the session key. 
✓ The Recipient Info blocks followed by the encrypted content constitute the 
enveloped Data. 
 
Signed data 
✓ The signed Data s/mime-type can be used with one or more signers. For clarity, we 
confine our description to the case of a single digital signature. 
The steps for preparing a signed Data MIME entity are: 
1. Select a message digest algorithm (SHA or MD5). 
2. Compute the message digest (hash function) of the content to be signed. 
3. Encrypt the message digest with the signer’s private key. 
4. Prepare a block known as Signer Info that contains the signer’s public key 
certificate, an identifier of the message digest algorithm, an identifier of the 
algorithm used to encrypt the message digest, and the encrypted message digest. 
✓ The signed Data entity consists of a series of blocks, including a message 
digest algorithm identifier, the message being signed, and Signer Info. 
 
Clear Signing 
✓ Clear signing is achieved using the multipart content type with a signed subtype. 
✓ A multipart/signed message has two parts. The first part can be any MIME type 
but must be prepared so that it will not be altered during transfer from source 
to destination. 
✓ This second part has a MIME content type of application and a subtype of 
pkcs7- signature. 
Page 41 
 

Cryptography -Module -4 
 
Registration Request 
An application or user will apply to a certification authority for a public-key certificate. 
The application/pkcs10 S/MIME entity is used to transfer a certification request. 
 
 
CERTIFICATES-ONLY MESSAGE 
A message containing only certificates or a certificate revocation list (CRL) can be 
sent in response to a registration request. The message is an application/pkcs7-mime 
type/subtype with an s/mime-type parameter of degenerate. 
 
S/MIME Certificate Processing 
S/MIME uses public-key certificates that confirm to version 3 of X.509. 
USER AGENT ROLE: 
An S/MIME user has several key-management functions to perform. 
➢ Key generation: The user of some related administrative utility MUST be 
capable of generating separate Diffie-Hellman and DSS key pairs and SHOULD 
be capable of generating RSA key pairs. Each key pair MUST be generated from 
a good source of a non-deterministic random input. A user agent SHOULD 
generate RSA key pairs with a length in the range of 768 – 1024 bits and MUST 
NOT generate less than 512 bits. 
➢ Registration: A user’s public key must be registered with a certification authority 
in order to receive an X.509 public-key certificate. 
➢ Certificate storage and retrieval: A user requires access to a local list 
of certificates in order to verify incoming signatures and to encrypt 
outgoing messages. 
 
VeriSign Certificates 
✓ There are several companies that provide certification authority (CA) services. 
VeriSign provides a CA service that is intended to be compatible with S/MIME and 
a variety of other applications. 
✓ VeriSign issues X.509 certificates with the product name VeriSign Digital ID. 
✓ The information contained in a Digital ID depends on the type of Digital ID and its use. 
✓ At a minimum, each Digital ID contains: 
➢ Owner’s public key 
➢ Owner’s name or alias 
➢ Expiration date of the Digital ID 
➢ Serial number of the Digital ID 
➢ Name of the certification authority that issued the Digital ID 
➢ Digital signature of the certification authority that issued the Digital ID. 
✓ Digital IDs can also contain user supplied information : 
➢ Address 
Page 42 
 

Cryptography -Module -4 
 
➢ Email address 
➢ Basic registration information ( Country ZIP code, age and gender) 
 
✓ VeriSign provides three levels, or classes, of security for public-key certificates. 
➢ For Class 1 Digital IDs, VeriSign confirms the user’s e-mail address by sending 
a PIN and Digital ID pick-up information to the e-mail address provided in the 
application. 
➢ For Class 2 Digital IDs, VeriSign verifies the information in the application 
through an automated comparison with a consumer database in addition to 
performing all of the checking associated with a Class 1 Digital ID. 
➢ For Class 3 Digital IDs, VeriSign requires a higher level of identity assurance. 
 
Enhanced Security Services: 
The three services are: 
➢ Signed receipts: A signed receipt may be requested in a Signed Data object. e. In 
essence, the recipient signs the entire original message plus the original (sender’s) 
signature and appends the new signature to form a new S/MIME messages. 
➢ Security labels: A security label may be included in the authenticated attributes 
of a Signed Data object. The labels may be used for access control, by indicating 
which users are permitted access to an object. 
 
➢ Secure mailing lists: When a user sends a message to multiple recipients, a 
certain amount of per-recipient processing is required, including the use of each 
recipient’s public key. The user can be relieved of this work by employing the 
services of an S/MIME Mail List Agent (MLA). An MLA can take a single incoming 
message, perform the recipient-specific encryption for each recipient, and 
forward the message. The originator of a message need only send the message to 
the MLA with encryption performed using the MLA’s public key. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 43 
 
 
