 
• 
• Three tests to be used in evaluating a random number generator: 
Pseudorandom number Generators
LinearCongruential Generators
MODULE 2

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Blum Blum Shub Generator 
• Then the BBS generator produces a sequence of bits Bi according 
to the following algorithm: 

 
 

 
Public key cryptography 
Principles of Public-Key Cryptosystems 
• Developed to address two key issues: 
1. Key distribution – how to have secure communications 
in general without having to trust a KDC with your key. 
2. Digital signatures – how to verify a message comes 
intact from the claimed sender. 

 
Public-Key Cryptosystems 
▪ Asymmetric algorithms rely on one key for encryption and a different but 
related key for decryption. These algorithms have the following important 
characteristic. 
• It is computationally infeasible to determine the decryption key given 
only knowledge of the cryptographic algorithm and the encryption key. 
• In addition, some algorithms, such as RSA, also exhibit the following 
characteristic. 
- Either of the two related keys can be used for encryption, with the 
other used for decryption. 

 
Public-Key Cryptography 

 

 
▪ A public-key encryption scheme has ingredients: 
1. Plaintext: This is the readable message or data that is fed into the algorithm as input. 
2. Encryption algorithm: The encryption algorithm performs various transformations on 
the plaintext. 
3.  Public and private keys: This is a pair of keys that have been selected so that if one is 
used for encryption, the other is used for decryption. The exact transformations 
performed by the algorithm depend on the public or private key that is provided as 
input. 
4. Ciphertext: This is the scrambled message produced as output. It depends on the 
plaintext and the key. For a given message, two different keys will produce two 
different ciphertexts. 
5. Decryption algorithm: This algorithm accepts the ciphertext and the matching key and 
produces the original plaintext. 

 
▪ The essential steps are the following. 
1. Generates a pair of keys to be used for the encryption and decryption 
of messages. 
2. Places one of the two keys in a public register or other accessible file. 
This is the public key. The companion key is kept private, each user 
maintains a collection of public keys obtained from others. 
3. If Bob wishes to send a confidential message to Alice, Bob encrypts 
the message using Alice’s public key. 
4. When Alice receives the message, she decrypts it using her private 
key. No other recipient can decrypt the message because only Alice 
knows Alice’s private key. 

Comparison 

 
Public-Key Cryptosystem: 
Confidentiality 

 
Public-Key Cryptosystem: 
Authentication 

 
Public-Key Cryptosystem: 
Authentication and Secrecy 

 
Applications of public-key cryptosystems 
➢ Encryption/decryption: The sender encrypts a message with 
the recipient’s public key, and the recipient decrypts the 
message with the recipient’s private key. 
➢ Digital signature: The sender “signs” a message with its private 
key. Signing is achieved by a cryptographic algorithm applied to 
the message or to a small block of data that is a function of the 
message. 
➢ Key exchange: Two sides cooperate to exchange a session key, 
which is a secret key for symmetric encryption generated for 
use for a particular transaction (or session) and valid for a short 
period of time. Several different approaches are possible, 
involving the private key(s) of one or both parties. 

 
Requirements for Public-Key Cryptography 
1. It is computationally easy for a party B to generate a pair (public key Pub , private key 
PRb). 
2.  It is computationally easy for a sender A, knowing the public key and the message to be 
encrypted, M, to generate the corresponding ciphertext: 
C = E(PUb, M) 
3. It is computationally easy for the receiver B to decrypt the resulting ciphertext using the 
private key to recover the original message: 
M = D(PRb,C) = D[PRb, E(PUb,M)] 
4. It is computationally infeasible for an adversary, knowing the public key, PUb, to 
determine the private key, PRb. 

 
5. It is computationally infeasible for an adversary, knowing the public key, PUb, and a 
ciphertext, C, to recover the original message, M. 
6. The two keys can be applied in either order: 
M = D[PUb, E(PRb, M)] = D[PRb, E(PUb, M)] 
▪ need a trap-door one-way function 
▪ one-way function has 
Y = f(X) easy 
X = f–1(Y) infeasible 
▪ A trap-door one-way function has 
Y = fk(X) easy, if k and X are known 
X = fk
–1(Y) easy, if k and Y are known 
X = fk
–1(Y) infeasible,, if Y known but k not known 
▪ A practical public-key scheme depends on a suitable trap-door one-way 
function 

 
Public-Key Cryptanalysis 
▪ Vulnerable to a brute-force attack (with small key size), Key size is 
larger enough to avoid brute-force attack. 
▪ Public key method depend on the use of mathematic equation or 
some function. 
▪ Public-key encryption is currently confined to key management and 
signature applications. 

 
The RSA Algorithm 
▪ Best known & widely used public-key scheme 
▪ Invented by Rivest, Shamir and Adleman in year 1977 and hence name RSA algorithm. 
▪ Plaintext and ciphertext are integers between 0 and n - 1 for some n. 
▪ RSA makes use of an expression with exponentials. Plaintext is encrypted in blocks, with 
each block having a binary value less than some number n. 
- block size must be less than or equal to log2(n) + 1 
▪ For some plaintext block M and ciphertext block C. 
C = Me mod n 
M = Cd mod n = (Me)d mod n = Med mod n 

 
 
▪ Both sender and receiver must know the value of n. 
▪ The sender knows the value of e, and only the receiver knows the value of d. 
▪ This is a public-key encryption algorithm with a public key of PU = {e, n} and a private 
key of PR = {d, n}. 
public key PU = {e, n} and private key PR = {d, n} 
▪ Ingredients of RSA: 

 
The RSA Algorithm 

 
Example: 
1. Select two prime numbers, p = 17 and q = 11. 
2. Calculate n = pq = 17 * 11 = 187. 
3. Calculate f(n) = (p - 1)(q - 1) = 16 * 10 = 160. 
4. Select e such that, GCD(160,e) = 1. we choose e = 7. 
5. Determine d such that de = 1 (mod 160) and d < 160. The correct 
value is d = 23, because 23 * 7 = 161 
161 = 1 (mod 160) 
6. Publish public key: PU = {e, n} = {7,187} 
7. Keep private key secret: PR = {d , n} = {23,187} 

 
▪ Given message M = 88 
• 
Encryption: 
C = 887 mod 187 = 11 
• Decryption: 
M = 1123 mod 187 = 88 

Fig: RSA Processing of Multiple Blocks

Computational Aspects 
1. Encryption/decryption 
MODULAR ARITHMETIC : 
[(a mod n) * (b mod n)] mod n = (a * b) mod n 
- reduces intermediate results modulo n. 
Efficient Operation Using The Public Key : To speed up the operation of the RSA 
algorithm using the public key, a specific choice of e is usually made, So the number of 
multiplications required to perform exponentiation is minimized. 
Efficient Operation Using The Private Key : there is a way to speed up Decryption 
computation using the CRT. 
2. Key generation 
Before the application of the public-key cryptosystem, each participant must generate 
a pair of keys. This involves the following tasks. 
■ Determining two prime numbers, p and q. 
■ Selecting either or calculating the others.

 
The Security of RSA 
▪ Five possible approaches for attacking the RSA algorithm are: 
1. Brute force: This involves trying all possible private keys. 
2. Mathematical attacks: There are several approaches, all equivalent in effort to 
factoring the product of two primes. 
3. Timing attacks: These depend on the running time of the decryption 
algorithm. 
4. Hardware fault-based attack: This involves inducing hardware faults in the 
processor that is generating digital signatures. 
5. Chosen ciphertext attacks: This type of attack exploits properties of the RSA 
algorithm. 

 
The Factoring Problem 
▪ We can identify three approaches to attacking RSA mathematically. 
1. Factor n into its two prime factors. This enables calculation of Φ(n) = (p - 1) * 
(q - 1), which in turn enables determination of d ≡ K e-1 (mod Φ(n)). 
2. Determine Φ(n) directly, without first determining p and q. Again, this enables 
determination of 
d ≡ K e-1 (mod Φ(n)). 
3. Determine d directly, without first determining Φ(n). 
▪ currently assume 1024–2048-bit RSA is secure 
- ensure p, q of similar size and matching other constraints 

 
Timing Attacks 
▪ developed by Paul Kocher in mid-1990’s 
▪ 
exploit timing variations in operations 
– eg. multiplying by small vs.. large number 
– or varying which instructions executed 
▪ 
infer operand size based on time taken 
▪ For RSA, exploits time taken for exponentiation 
▪ 
countermeasures 
– use constant exponentiation time 
– add random delays 
– blind values used in calculations 

 
Chosen Ciphertext Attacks 
▪ RSA is vulnerable to a Chosen Ciphertext Attack (CCA) 
▪ based on C(P1 x P2) = C(P1) x C(P2) 
▪ attacker chooses ciphertexts and gets decrypted plaintext 
back 
▪ choose ciphertext to exploit properties of RSA to provide 
info to help cryptanalysis 
▪ can counter with random pad off plaintext 
▪ or use Optimal Asymmetric Encryption Padding (OASP) 

Encryption Using Optimal Asymmetric 
Encryption Padding (OAEP) 
• To counter such attacks, 
RSA  Security  Inc., 
a 
leading RSA vendor and 
former holder of the RSA 
patent, recommends 
modifying the plaintext 
using a procedure known 
as optimal asymmetric 
encryption   
  padding 
(OAEP). 

 
Problems on RSA: 
1. Perform encryption and decryption using the RSA algorithm for the following: 
i. 
p = 3; q = 11, e = 7; M = 5 
ii. p = 5; q = 11, e = 3; M = 9 
iii. p = 7; q = 11, e = 17; M = 8 
iv. p = 11; q = 13, e = 11; M = 7 
v. p = 17; q = 31, e = 7; M = 2 
2. In a public-key system using RSA, you intercept the ciphertext C = 10 sent to a 
user whose public key is e = 5, n = 35. What is the plaintext M? 

 
Diffie-Hellman key exchange 
▪ First public-key type scheme proposed by Diffie & Hellman in 1976 for key 
distribution only. 
▪ Purpose of the algorithm is to enable two users to exchange a secret key 
securely that then can be used for subsequent encryption of messages. 
▪ The algorithm itself is limited to the exchange of the keys. 

The Algorithm 
▪ There are two publicly known numbers: a prime number q and an integer α that is a primitive root 
of q. 
▪ Suppose the users A and B wish to create a shared key. 

 
Example: 
▪ 
Let’s take q = 353 and α= 3 (a primitive root of 353). 
▪ 
A and B select private keys XA = 97 and XB = 233, respectively. 
▪ 
Each computes its public key: 
A computes YA = 397 mod 353 = 40. 
B computes YB = 3233 mod 353 = 248. 
▪ 
After they exchange public keys, each can compute the common secret key: 
A computes K = (YB)XA mod 353 = 24897 mod 353 = 160. 
B computes K = (YA)XB mod 353 = 40233 mod 353 = 160. 
▪ 
An attacker would have available the following information but not Private Keys: 
q = 353; α = 3; YA = 40; YB = 248. 

 
Man-in-the-Middle Attack 
▪ 
Suppose Alice and Bob wish to exchange keys, and Darth is the adversary. 
▪ 
The attack proceeds as follows 
1. Darth prepares for the attack by generating two random private keys XD1 and XD2 and then 
computing the corresponding public keys YD1 and YD2. 
2. Alice transmits YA to Bob. 
3. Darth intercepts YA and transmits YD1 to Bob. Darth also calculates K2 = (YA)X D2 mod q. 
4. Bob receives YD1 and calculates K1 = (YD1)XB mod q. 
5. Bob transmits YB to Alice. 
6. Darth intercepts YB and transmits YD2 to Alice. Darth calculates K1 = (YB)XD1 mod q. 
7. Alice receives YD2 and calculates K2 = (YD2)XA mod q. 

 
▪ 
At this point, Bob and Alice think that they share a secret key, but instead Bob and Darth share 
secret key K1 and Alice and Darth share secret key K2. 
▪ 
All future communication between Bob and Alice is compromised in the following way. 
1. Alice sends an encrypted message M: E(K2, M). 
2. Darth intercepts the encrypted message and decrypts it to recover M. 
3. Darth sends Bob E(K1, M) or E(K1, M′), where M′ is any message. 
▪ 
In the first case, Darth simply wants to eavesdrop on the communication without altering it. 
▪ 
In the second case, Darth wants to modify the message going to Bob. 


Problems on Diffie-Hellman algorithm 
1. Users A and B use the Diffie-Hellman key exchange technique with a common prime q = 71 and a 
primitive root α = 7. 
a. If user A has private key XA = 5, what is A’s public key YA? 
b. If user B has private key XB = 12, what is B’s public key YB? 
c. What is the shared secret key? 
2. Consider a Diffie-Hellman scheme with a common prime q = 11 and a primitive root α = 2. 
a. If user A has public key YA = 9, what is A’s private key XA? 
b. If user B has public key YB = 3, what is the secret key K shared with A? 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Elliptic Curve Cryptography 
• Key exchange using elliptic curves 
• 
It is a Public Key Cryptosystem 
• 
It provides Equal security with smaller key size compared to Non ECC Algorithms 
• 
It makes use of Elliptic curves 
• 
Elliptic curves are defined by some mathematical functions. 𝑦2 = 𝑥3 + ax + b 

 
Analog of Diffie-Hellman key Exchange 
• Key exchange using elliptic curves can be done in the 
following manner. 
• First pick a large integer q, which is either a prime number q 
or an integer of the form 2𝑚, and elliptic curve parameters a 
and b. This defines the elliptic group of points 𝑬𝒒(a, b). Next, 
pick a base point G = (𝒙𝟏, 𝒚𝟏) on an elliptic curve. The order n 
of a point G on an elliptic curve is the large positive integer n 
and these parameters of the cryptosystem known to all 
participants. 

 
 

 
ECC Diffie–Hellman Key Exchange 

 
Elliptic Curve Encryption/Decryption 
• Let the message be m. 
• First Encode this message as an (x, y) point 𝑷𝒎 on elliptic curve. 
• To encrypt and send a message Pm to B, A chooses a random 
positive integer k and produces the ciphertext 𝑪𝒎 consisting of 
the pair of points: 
• This point will be sent to the receiver. 
• To decrypt the ciphertext, B multiplies the first point in the 
cypertext pair by B’s private key and subtracts the result from 
the second point: 

 
Security of Elliptic Curve Cryptography 
• The security of ECC depends on how difficult it is to determine k. 
• This is referred to as the elliptic curve logarithm problem. The 
fastest known technique for taking the elliptic curve logarithm is 
known as the Pollard rho method. 
▪ Considerably smaller key size can be used for ECC compared to 
RSA. 
▪ There is a computational advantage of using ECC with a shorter 
key length than a comparably secure RSA. 

 
Comparable Key Sizes in Terms of Computational 
Effort for Cryptanalysis 
