Module 5 
9.4 Backward Chaining  
This algorithm work backward from the goal, chaining through rules to find known facts that support the 
proof. It is called with a list of goals containing the original query, and returns the set of all substitutions 
satisfying the query. The algorithm takes the first goal in the list and finds every clause in the knowledge 
base whose head, unifies with the goal. Each such clause creates a new recursive call in which body, of the 
clause is added to the goal stack . Remember that facts are clauses with a head but no body, so when a goal 
unifies with a known fact, no new sub goals are added to the stack and the goal is solved. The algorithm for 
backward chaining and proof tree for finding criminal (West) using backward chaining are given below. 
 

Logic programming:  
• Prolog is by far the most widely used logic programming language.  
• Prolog programs are sets of definite clauses written in a notation different from standard first-order 
logic.  
• Prolog uses uppercase letters for variables and lowercase for constants.  
• Clauses are written with the head preceding the body; " : -" is used for left implication, commas 
separate literals in the body, and a period marks the end of a sentence . 
 
• Prolog includes "syntactic sugar" for list notation and arithmetic. Prolog program for append (X, Y, 
Z), which succeeds if list Z is the result of appending lists x and Y. 
 
• For example, we can ask the query append (A, B, [1, 2]): what two lists can be appended to give [1, 
2]? We get back the solutions 
 
• The execution of Prolog programs is done via depth-first backward chaining  
• Prolog allows a form of negation called negation as failure. A negated goal not P is considered 
proved if the system fails to prove p. Thus, the sentence  
• Alive (X) : - not dead(X) can be read as "Everyone is alive if not provably dead."  
• Prolog has an equality operator, =, but it lacks the full power of logical equality. An equality goal 
succeeds if the two terms are unifiable and fails otherwise. So X+Y=2+3 succeeds with x bound to 
2 and Y bound to 3, but Morningstar=evening star fails.  
• The occur check is omitted from Prolog's unification algorithm. 
Efficient implementation of logic programs:  
• The execution of a Prolog program can happen in two modes: interpreted and compiled.  
• Interpretation essentially amounts to running the FOL-BC-ASK algorithm, with the program as the 
knowledge base. These are designed to maximize speed.  
• First, instead of constructing the list of all possible answers for each sub goal before continuing to 
the next, Prolog interpreters generate one answer and a "promise" to generate the rest when the 
current answer has been fully explored. This promise is called a choice point.FOL-BC-ASK spends 
a good deal of time in generating and composing substitutions  when a path in search fails. Prolog 
will backup to previous choice point and unbind some variables. This is called ―TRAIL‖. So, new 
variable is bound by UNIFY-VAR and it is pushed on to trail.  
• Prolog Compilers compile into an intermediate language i.e., Warren Abstract Machine or WAM 
named after David. H. D. Warren who is one of the implementers of first prolog compiler. So, WAM 
is an abstract instruction set that is suitable for prolog and can be either translated or interpreted into 
machine language.  
Continuations are used to implement choice point’scontinuation as packaging up a procedure and a list 
of arguments that together define what should be done next whenever the current goal succeeds.  
Parallelization can also provide substantial speedup. There are two principal sources of parallelism  

1. The first, called OR-parallelism, comes from the possibility of a goal unifying with many different 
clauses in the knowledge base. Each gives rise to an independent branch in the search space that can lead 
to a potential solution, and all such branches can be solved in parallel.  
2. The second, called AND-parallelism, comes from the possibility of solving each conjunct in the body 
of an implication in parallel. AND-parallelism is more difficult to achieve, because solutions for the whole 
conjunction require consistent bindings for all the variables.  
Redundant inference and infinite loops: 
Consider the following logic program that decides if a path exists between two points on a directed graph. 
 
A simple three-node graph, described by the facts link (a, b) and link (b, c) 
 
It generates the query path (a, c)  
Hence each node is connected to two random successors in the next layer. 
 
Constraint logic programming:  
The Constraint Satisfaction problem can be solved in prolog as same like backtracking algorithm. Because 
it works only for finite domain CSP’s in prolog terms there must be finite number of solutions for any goal 
with unbound variables. 
 
 
• If we have a query, triangle (3, 4, and 5) works fine but the query like, triangle (3, 4, Z) no solution.  
• The difficulty is variable in prolog can be in one of two states i.e., Unbound or bound.  
• Binding a variable to a particular term can be viewed as an extreme form of constraint namely 
“equality”.CLP allows variables to be constrained rather than bound.  
• The solution to triangle (3, 4, Z) is Constraint 7>=Z>=1. 
 
 

9.5 RESOLUTION 
As in the propositional case, first-order resolution requires that sentences be in conjunctive normal form 
(CNF) that is, a conjunction of clauses, where each clause is a disjunction of literals.  
Literals can contain variables, which are assumed to be universally quantified. Every sentence of first-order 
logic can be converted into an inferentially equivalent CNF sentence. We will illustrate the procedure by 
translating the sentence  
"Everyone who loves all animals is loved by someone," or 
 
The steps are as follows:  
• Eliminate implications:  
 
• Move Negation inwards: In addition to the usual rules for negated connectives, we need rules for 
negated quantifiers. Thus, we have  
 
Our sentence goes through the following transformations. 
 
Standardize variables: For sentences like  
use the same variable name twice, change the name of one of the variables. This avoids confusion later 
when we drop the quantifiers. Thus, we have 
 
Skolemize: Skolemization is the process of removing existential quantifiers by elimination. Translate 3 x 
P(x) into P(A), where A is a new constant. If we apply this rule to our sample sentence, however, we 
obtain  
 
Which has the wrong meaning entirely: it says that everyone either fails to love a particular animal A or is 
loved by some particular entity B. In fact, our original sentence allows each person to fail to love a different 
animal or to be loved by a different person.  
Thus, we want the Skolem entities to depend on x: 
 
Here F and G are Skolem functions. The general rule is that the arguments of the Skolem function are all 
the universally quantified variables in whose scope the existential quantifier appears.  
• Drop universal quantifiers: At this point, all remaining variables must be universally quantified. 
Moreover, the sentence is equivalent to one in which all the universal quantifiers have been moved 
to the left. We can therefore drop the universal quantifiers  
 

• Distribute V over A 
 
This is the CNF form of given sentence.  
The resolution inference rule:  
The resolution rule for first-order clauses is simply a lifted version of the propositional resolution rule. 
Propositional literals are complementary if one is the negation of the other; first-order literals are 
complementary if one unifies with the negation of the other. Thus we have 
 
Where UNIFY (li, m j) == θ.  
For example, we can resolve the two clauses 
 
By eliminating the complementary literals Loves (G(x), x) and ¬Loves (u, v), with unifier  
θ = {u/G(x), v/x), to produce the resolvent clause  
 
Example proofs:  
Resolution proves that KB /= a by proving KB A la unsatisfiable, i.e., by deriving the empty clause. The 
sentences in CNF are 
 
The resolution proof is shown in below figure; 
 
Notice the structure: single "spine" beginning with the goal clause, resolving against clauses from the knowledge 
base until the empty clause is generated. Backward chaining is really just a special case of resolution with a 
particular control strategy to decide which resolution to perform next. 

 
10.1 CLASSICAL PLANNING 
Planning Classical Planning: AI as the study of rational action, which means that planning—devising a 
plan of action to achieve one’s goals—is a critical part of AI. We have seen two examples of planning agents 
so far the search-based problem-solving agent.  
DEFINITION OF CLASSICAL PLANNING: The problem-solving agent can find sequences of actions 
that result in a goal state. But it deals with atomic representations of states and thus needs good domain-
specific heuristics to perform well. The hybrid propositional logical agent can find plans without domain-
specific heuristics because it uses domain-independent heuristics based on the logical structure of the 
problem but it relies on ground (variable-free) propositional inference, which means that it may be 
swamped when there are many actions and states. For example, in the world, the simple action of moving 
astep forward had to be repeated for all four agent orientations, T time steps, and n2 current locations.  
In response to this, planning researchers have settled on a factored representation— one in which a state 
of the world is represented by a collection of variables. We use a language called PDDL, the Planning 
Domain Definition Language that allows us to express all 4Tn2 actions with one action schema. There have 
been several versions of PDDL.we select a simple version and alter its syntax to be consistent with the rest 
of the book. We now show how PDDL describes the four things we need to define a search problem: the 
initial state, the actions that are available in a state, the result of applying an action, and the goal test.  
Each state is represented as a conjunction of flaunts that are ground, functionless atoms. For example, Poor 
∧ Unknown might represent the state of a hapless agent, and a state in a package delivery problem might 
be At(Truck 1, Melbourne) ∧ At(Truck 2, Sydney ). Database semantics is used: the closed-world 
assumption means that any flaunts that are not mentioned are false, and the unique names assumption means 
that Truck 1 and Truck 2 are distinct.  
A set of ground (variable-free) actions can be represented by a single action schema. The schema is a lifted 
representation—it lifts the level of reasoning from propositional logic to a restricted subset of first-order 
logic. For example, here is an action schema for flying a plane from one location to another:  
Action(Fly (p, from, to),  
PRECOND:At(p, from) ∧ Plane(p) ∧ Airport (from) ∧ Airport (to)  
EFFECT:¬At(p, from) ∧ At(p, to))  
The schema consists of the action name, a list of all the variables used in the schema, a precondition and an 
effect.  
A set of action schemas serves as a definition of a planning domain. A specific problem within the domain 
is defined with the addition of an initial state and a goal.  
state is a conjunction of ground atoms. (As with all states, the closed-world assumption is used, which 
means that any atoms that are not mentioned are false.) The goal is just like a precondition: a conjunction 
of literals (positive or negative) that may contain variables, such as At(p, SFO ) ∧ Plane(p). Any variables 
are treated as existentially quantified, so this goal is to have any plane at SFO. The problem is solved when 
we can find a sequence of actions that end in a states that entails the goal.  
Example: Air cargo transport 
An air cargo transport problem involving loading and unloading cargo and flying it from place to place. 
The problem can be defined with three actions: Load , Unload , and Fly . The actions affect two predicates: 
In(c, p) means that cargo c is inside plane p, and At(x, a) means that object x (either plane or cargo) is at 
airport a. Note that some care must be taken to make sure the At predicates are maintained properly. When 
a plane flies from one airport to another, all the cargo inside the plane goes with it. In first-order logic it 

would be easy to quantify over all objects that are inside the plane. But basic PDDL does not have a 
universal quantifier, so we need a different solution. The approach we use is to say that a piece of cargo 
ceases to be At anywhere when it is In a plane; the cargo only becomes At the new airport when it is 
unloaded. So At really means “available for use at a given location.”  
The complexity of classical planning :  
We consider the theoretical complexity of planning and distinguish two decision problems. PlanSAT is the 
question of whether there exists any plan that solves a planning problem. Bounded PlanSAT asks whether 
there is a solution of length k or less; this can be used to find an optimal plan. 
The first result is that both decision problems are decidable for classical planning. The proof follows from 
the fact that the number of states is finite. But if we add function symbols to the language, then the number 
of states becomes infinite, and PlanSAT becomes only semi decidable: an algorithm exists that will 
terminate with the correct answer for any solvable problem, but may not terminate on unsolvable problems. 
The Bounded PlanSAT problem remains decidable even in the presence of function symbols.  
Both PlanSAT and Bounded PlanSAT are in the complexity class PSPACE, a class that is larger (and hence 
more difficult) than NP and refers to problems that can be solved by a deterministic Turing machine with a 
polynomial amount of space. Even if we make some rather severe restrictions, the problems remain quite 
difficult. 
10.2 ALGORITHMS FOR PLANNING AS STATE-SPACE SEARCH 
Forward (progression) state-space search:  
Now that we have shown how a planning problem maps into a search problem, we can solve 
planning problems with any of the heuristic search algorithms from Chapter 3 or a local 
search algorithm from Chapter 4 (provided we keep track of the actions used to reach the 
goal). From the earliest days of planning research (around 1961) until around 1998 it was 
assumed that forward state-space search was too inefficient to be practical. It is not hard to 
come up with reasons why .  
First, forward search is prone to exploring irrelevant actions. Consider the noble task of 
buying a copy of AI: A Modern Approach from an online bookseller. Suppose there is an 
action schema Buy(isbn) with effect Own(isbn). ISBNs are 10 digits, so this action schema 
represents 10 billion ground actions. An uninformed forward-search algorithm would have 
to start enumerating these 10 billion actions to find one that leads to the goal.  
Second, planning problems often have large state spaces. Consider an air cargo problem 
with 10 airports, where each airport has 5 planes and 20 pieces of cargo. The goal is to move 
all the cargo at airport A to airport B. There is a simple solution to the problem: load the 20 
pieces of cargo into one of the planes at A, fly the plane to B, and unload the cargo. Finding 
the solution can be difficult because the average branching factor is huge: each of the 50 
planes can fly to 9 other airports, and each of the 200 packages can be either unloaded (if it 
is loaded) or loaded into any plane at its airport (if it is unloaded). So in any state there is a 
minimum of 450 actions (when all the packages are at airports with no planes) and a 
maximum of 10,450 (when all packages and planes are at the same airport). On average, 
let’s say there are about 2000 possible actions per state, so the search graph up to the depth 
of the obvious solution has about 2000 nodes. 

 
Backward (regression) relevant-states search:  
In regression search we start at the goal and apply the actions backward until we find a 
sequence of steps that reaches the initial state. It is called relevant-states search because we 
only consider actions that are relevant to the goal (or current state). As in belief-state search 
(Section 4.4), there is a set of relevant states to consider at each step, not just a single state.  
We start with the goal, which is a conjunction of literals forming a description of a set of 
states—for example, the goal ¬Poor ∧ Famous describes those states in which Poor is false, 
Famous is true, and any other fluent can have any value. If there are n ground flaunts in a 
domain, then there are 2n ground states (each fluent can be true or false), but 3n descriptions 
of sets of goal states (each fluent can be positive, negative, or not mentioned).  
In general, backward search works only when we know how to regress from a state 
description to the predecessor state description. For example, it is hard to search backwards 
for a solution to the n-queens. 
problem because there is no easy way to describe the states that are one move away from 
the goal. Happily, the PDDL representation was designed to make it easy to regress 
actions—if a domain can be expressed in PDDL, then we can do regression search on it.  
The final issue is deciding which actions are candidates to regress over. In the forward 
direction we chose actions that were applicable—those actions that could be the next step 
in the plan. In backward search we want actions that are relevant—those actions that could 
be the last step in a plan leading up to the current goal state.  

Heuristics for planning:  
Neither forward nor backward search is efficient without a good heuristic function. Recall 
from Chapter 3 that a heuristic function h(s) estimates the distance from a state s to the goal 
and that if we can derive an admissible heuristic for this distance—one that does not 
overestimate—then we can use A∗ search to find optimal solutions. An admissible heuristic 
can be derived by defining a relaxed problem that is easier to solve. The exact cost of a 
solution to this easier problem then becomes the heuristic for the original problem.  
By definition, there is no way to analyze an atomic state, and thus it it requires some 
ingenuity by a human analyst to define good domain-specific heuristics for search problems 
with atomic states. Planning uses a factored representation for states and action schemas. 
That makes it possible to define good domain-independent heuristics and for programs to 
automatically apply a good domain-independent heuristic for a given problem. 
10.3 Planning Graphs:  
All of the heuristics we have suggested can suffer from inaccuracies. This section shows 
how a special data structure called a planning graph can be used to give better heuristic 
estimates. These heuristics can be applied to any of the search techniques we have seen so 
far. Alternatively, we can search for a solution over the space formed by the planning graph, 
using an algorithm called GRAPHPLAN.  
 
Figure 10.7 shows a simple planning problem, and Figure 10.8 shows its planning graph. 
Each action at level Ai is connected to its preconditions at Si and its effects at Si+1. So a 
literal appears because an action caused it, but we also want to say that a literal can persist 

if no action negates it. This is represented by a persistence action (sometimes called a no-
op). For every literal C, we add to the problem a persistence action with precondition C 
and effect C. Level A0 in Figure 10.8 shows one “real” action, Eat (Cake), along with two 
persistence actions drawn as small square boxes. 
 
 
A planning problem asks if we can reach a goal state from the initial state. Suppose we are 
given a tree of all possible actions from the initial state to successor states, and their 
successors, and so on. If we indexed this tree appropriately, we could answer the planning 
question “can we reach state G from state S0” immediately, just by looking it up. Of course, 

the tree is of exponential size, so this approach is impractical. A planning graph is 
polynomial- size approximation to this tree that can be constructed quickly. The planning 
graph can’t answer definitively whether G is reachable from S0, but it can estimate how 
many steps it takes to reach G. The estimate is always correct when it reports the goal is not 
reachable, and it never overestimates the number of steps, so it is an admissible heuristic. 
A planning graph is a directed graph organized into levels: first a level S0 for the initial state, 
consisting of nodes representing each fluent that holds in S0; then a level A0 consisting of 
nodes for each ground action that might be applicable in S0; then alternating levels Si 
followed by Ai; until we reach a termination condition (to be discussed later).  
Roughly speaking, Si contains all the literals that could hold at time i, depending on the 
actions executed at preceding time steps. If it is possible that either P or ¬P could hold, then 
both will be represented in Si. Also roughly speaking, Ai contains all the actions that could 
have their preconditions satisfied at time i. We say “roughly speaking” because the planning 
graph records only a restricted subset of the possible negative interactions among actions; 
therefore, a literal might show up at level Sj when actually it could not be true until a later 
level, if at all. (A literal will never show up too late.) Despite the possible error, the level j 
at which a literal first appears is a good estimate of how difficult it is to achieve the literal 
from the initial state.  
We now define mutex links for both actions and literals. A mutex relation holds between 
two actions at a given level if any of the following three conditions holds:  
• Inconsistent effects: one action negates an effect of the other. For example, Eat(Cake) and 
the persistence of Have(Cake) have inconsistent effects because they disagree on the effect 
Have(Cake).  
• Interference: one of the effects of one action is the negation of a precondition of the other. 
For example Eat(Cake) interferes with the persistence of Have(Cake) by its precondition.  
• Competing needs: one of the preconditions of one action is mutually exclusive with a 
precondition of the other. For example, Bake(Cake) and Eat(Cake) are mutex because they 
compete on the value of the Have(Cake) precondition. 
A mutex relation holds between two literals at the same level if one is the negation of the 
other or if each possible pair of actions that could achieve the two literals is mutually 
exclusive. This condition is called inconsistent support. For example, Have(Cake) and 
Eaten(Cake) are mutex in S1 because the only way of achieving Have(Cake), the persistence 
action, is mutex with the only way of achieving Eaten(Cake), namely Eat(Cake). In S2 the 
two literals are not mutex, because there are new ways of achieving them, such as 
Bake(Cake) and the persistence of Eaten(Cake), that are not mutex.  other Classical Planning 
Approaches:  
Currently the most popular and effective approaches to fully automated planning are:  
• Translating to a Boolean satisfiability (SAT) problem  
• Forward state-space search with carefully crafted heuristics  

• Search using a planning graph (Section 10.3) 
These three approaches are not the only ones tried in the 40-year history of automated 
planning. Figure 10.11 shows some of the top systems in the International Planning 
Competitions, which have been held every even year since 1998. In this section we first 
describe the translation to a satisfiability problem and then describe three other influential 
approaches: planning as first-order logical deduction; as constraint satisfaction; and as plan 
refinement.  
Classical planning as Boolean satisfiability :  
we saw how SATPLAN solves planning problems that are expressed in propositional logic. 
Here we show how to translate a PDDL description into a form that can be processed by 
SATPLAN. The translation is a series of straightforward steps:  
• Proposition Alize the actions: replace each action schema with a set of ground actions 
formed by substituting constants for each of the variables. These ground actions are not part 
of the translation, but will be used in subsequent steps.  
• Define the initial state: assert F 0 for every fluent F in the problem’s initial state, and ¬F 
for every fluent not mentioned in the initial state.  
• Proposition Alize the goal: for every variable in the goal, replace the literals that contain 
the variable with a disjunction over constants. For example, the goal of having block A on 
another block, On(A, x) ∧ Block (x) in a world with objects A, B and C, would be replaced 
by the goal  
(On(A, A) ∧ Block (A)) ∨ (On(A, B) ∧ Block (B)) ∨ (On(A, C) ∧ Block (C)) . 
• Add successor-state axioms: For each fluent F , add an axiom of the form  
F t+1 ⇔ ActionCausesF t ∨ (F t ∧ ¬ActionCausesNotF t) ,  
where Action CausesF is a disjunction of all the ground actions that have F in their add list, 
and Action CausesNotF is a disjunction of all the ground actions that have F in their delete 
list.  
Analysis of Planning approaches:  
Planning combines the two major areas of AI we have covered so far: search and logic. A 
planner can be seen either as a program that searches for a solution or as one that 
(constructively) proves the existence of a solution. The cross-fertilization of ideas from the 
two areas has led both to improvements in performance amounting to several orders of 
magnitude in the last decade and to an increased use of planners in industrial applications. 
Unfortunately, we do not yet have a clear understanding of which techniques work best on 
which kinds of problems. Quite possibly, new techniques will emerge that dominate existing 
methods. 
Planning is foremost an exercise in controlling combinatorial explosion. If there are n 
propositions in a domain, then there are 2n states. As we have seen, planning is PSPACE- 

hard. Against such pessimism, the identification of independent sub problems can be a 
powerful weapon. In the best case—full decomposability of the problem—we get an 
exponential speedup.  
Decomposability is destroyed, however, by negative interactions between actions. 
GRAPHPLAN records mutexes to point out where the difficult interactions are. SATPLAN 
rep- resents a similar range of mutex relations, but does so by using the general CNF form 
rather than a specific data structure. Forward search addresses the problem heuristically by 
trying to find patterns (subsets of propositions) that cover the independent sub problems. 
Since this approach is heuristic, it can work even when the sub problems are not completely 
independent.  
Sometimes it is possible to solve a problem efficiently by recognizing that negative 
interactions can be ruled out. We say that a problem has serializable sub goals if there exists 
an order of sub goals such that the planner can achieve them in that order without having to 
undo any of the previously achieved sub goals. For example, in the blocks world, if the goal 
is to build a tower (e.g., A on B, which in turn is on C, which in turn is on the Table, as in 
Figure 10.4 on page 371), then the sub goals are serializable bottom to top: if we first achieve 
C on Table, we will never have to undo it while we are achieving the other sub goals. 
Planners such as GRAPHPLAN, SATPLAN, and FF have moved the field of planning 
forward, by raising the level of performance of planning systems. 
Planning and Acting in the Real World:  
This allows human experts to communicate to the planner what they know about how to 
solve the problem. Hierarchy also lends itself to efficient plan construction because the 
planner can solve a problem at an abstract level before delving into details. Presents agent 
architectures that can handle uncertain environments and interleave deliberation with 
execution, and gives some examples of real-world systems.  
Time, Schedules, and Resources:  
The classical planning representation talks about what to do, and in what order, but the 
representation cannot talk about time: how long an action takes and when it occurs. For 
example, the planners of Chapter 10 could produce a schedule for an airline that says which 
planes are assigned to which flights, but we really need to know departure and arrival times 
as well. This is the subject matter of scheduling. The real world also imposes many resource 
constraints; for example, an airline has a limited number of staff—and staff who are on one 
flight cannot be on another at the same time. This section covers methods for representing 
and solving planning problems that include temporal and resource constraints. 
The approach we take in this section is “plan first, schedule later”: that is, we divide the 
overall problem into a planning phase in which actions are selected, with some ordering 
constraints, to meet the goals of the problem, and a later scheduling phase, in which temporal 
information is added to the plan to ensure that it meets resource and deadline constraints. 

 
This approach is common in real-world manufacturing and logistical settings, where the 
planning phase is often performed by human experts. The automated methods of Chapter 10 
can also be used for the planning phase, provided that they produce plans with just the 
minimal ordering constraints required for correctness. GRAPHPLAN (Section 10.3), 
SATPLAN (Section 10.4.1), and partial-order planners (Section 10.4.4) can do this; search-
based methods (Section 10.2) produce totally ordered plans, but these can easily be 
converted to plans with minimal ordering constraints.  
Termination of GRAPHPLAN 
So far, we have skated over the question of termination. Here we show that GRAPHPLAN 
will in fact terminate and return failure when there is no solution. The first thing to 
understand is why we can’t stop expanding the graph as soon as it has leveled off. Consider 
an air cargo domain with one plane and n pieces of cargo at airport A, all of which have 
airport B as their destination. In this version of the problem, only one piece of cargo can fit 
in the plane at a time. The graph will level off at level 4, reflecting the fact that for any single 
piece of cargo, we can load it, fly it, and unload it at the destination in three steps. But that 
does not mean that a solution can be extracted from the graph at level 4; in fact a solution 
will require 4n − 1 steps: for each piece of cargo we load, fly, and unload, and for all but the 
last piece we need to fly back to airport A to get the next piece. 
How long do we have to keep expanding after the graph has leveled off? If the function 
EXTRACT-SOLUTION fails to find a solution, then there must have been at least one set 
of goals that were not achievable and were marked as a no-good. So if it is possible that 
there might be fewer no-goods in the next level, then we should continue. As soon as the 
graph itself and the no-goods have both leveled off, with no solution found, we can terminate 
with failure because there is no possibility of a subsequent change that could add a solution. 
 
The properties are as follows: 

 
