2.3 Parallel hardware
31
Simultaneous multithreading, or SMT, is a variation on ﬁne-grained multi-
threading. It attempts to exploit superscalar processors by allowing multiple threads
to make use of the multiple functional units. If we designate “preferred” threads—
threads that have many instructions ready to execute—we can somewhat reduce the
problem of thread slowdown.
2.3 Parallel hardware
Multiple issue and pipelining can clearly be considered to be parallel hardware, since
different functional units can be executed simultaneously. However, since this form
of parallelism isn’t usually visible to the programmer, we’re treating both of them as
extensions to the basic von Neumann model, and for our purposes, parallel hardware
will be limited to hardware that’s visible to the programmer. In other words, if she
can readily modify her source code to exploit it, or if she must modify her source
code to exploit it, then we’ll consider the hardware to be parallel.
2.3.1 Classiﬁcations of parallel computers
We’ll make use of two, independent classiﬁcations of parallel computers. The ﬁrst,
Flynn’s taxonomy [20], classiﬁes a parallel computer according to the number of in-
struction streams and the number of data streams (or datapaths) it can simultaneously
manage. A classical von Neumann system is therefore a single instruction stream,
single data stream, or SISD system, since it executes a single instruction at a time
and, in most cases, computes a single data value at a time. The parallel systems in
the classiﬁcation can always manage multiple data streams, and we differentiate be-
tween systems that support only a single instruction stream (SIMD) and systems that
support multiple instruction streams (MIMD).
We already encountered the alternative classiﬁcation in Chapter 1: it has to do
with how the cores access memory. In shared memory systems, the cores can share
access to memory locations, and the cores coordinate their work by modifying shared
memory locations. In distributed memory systems, each core has its own, private
memory, and the cores coordinate their work by communicating across a network.
2.3.2 SIMD systems
Single instruction, multiple data, or SIMD, systems are parallel systems. As the
name suggests, SIMD systems operate on multiple data streams by applying the same
instruction to multiple data items, so an abstract SIMD system can be thought of as
having a single control unit and multiple datapaths. An instruction is broadcast from
the control unit to the datapaths, and each datapath either applies the instruction to
the current data item, or it is idle. As an example, suppose we want to carry out a
“vector addition.” That is, suppose we have two arrays x and y, each with n elements,
and we want to add the elements of y to the elements of x:
MODULE 1

32
CHAPTER 2 Parallel hardware and parallel software
for
( i = 0;
i <
n ;
i++)
x [ i ] +=
y [ i ] ;
Suppose further that our SIMD system has n datapaths. Then we could load x[i] and
y[i] into the ith datapath, have the ith datapath add y[i] to x[i], and store the result in
x[i]. If the system has m datapaths and m < n, we can simply execute the additions
in blocks of m elements at a time. For example, if m = 4 and n = 15, we can ﬁrst
add elements 0 to 3, then elements 4 to 7, then elements 8 to 11, and ﬁnally elements
12 to 14. Note that in the last group of elements in our example—elements 12 to
14—we’re only operating on three elements of x and y, so one of the four datapaths
will be idle.
The requirement that all the datapaths execute the same instruction or are idle can
seriously degrade the overall performance of a SIMD system. For example, suppose
we only want to carry out the addition if y[i] is positive:
for
( i = 0;
i <
n ;
i++)
i f
( y [ i ] > 0 . 0 )
x [ i ] +=
y [ i ] ;
In this setting, we must load each element of y into a datapath and determine whether
it’s positive. If y[i] is positive, we can proceed to carry out the addition. Otherwise,
the datapath storing y[i] will be idle while the other datapaths carry out the addition.
Note also that in a “classical” SIMD system, the datapaths must operate syn-
chronously, that is, each datapath must wait for the next instruction to be broadcast
before proceeding. Furthermore, the datapaths have no instruction storage, so a data-
path can’t delay execution of an instruction by storing it for later execution.
Finally, as our ﬁrst example shows, SIMD systems are ideal for parallelizing sim-
ple loops that operate on large arrays of data. Parallelism that’s obtained by dividing
data among the processors and having the processors all apply (more or less) the same
instructions to their subsets of the data is called data-parallelism. SIMD parallelism
can be very efﬁcient on large data parallel problems, but SIMD systems often don’t
do very well on other types of parallel problems.
SIMD systems have had a somewhat checkered history. In the early 1990s,
a maker of SIMD systems (Thinking Machines) was one of the largest manufacturers
of parallel supercomputers. However, by the late 1990s, the only widely produced
SIMD systems were vector processors. More recently, graphics processing units, or
GPUs, and desktop CPUs are making use of aspects of SIMD computing.
Vector processors
Although what constitutes a vector processor has changed over the years, their key
characteristic is that they can operate on arrays or vectors of data, while conventional
CPUs operate on individual data elements or scalars. Typical recent systems have the
following characteristics:
•
Vector registers. These are registers capable of storing a vector of operands and
operating simultaneously on their contents. The vector length is ﬁxed by the sys-
tem, and can range from 4 to 256 64-bit elements.

2.3 Parallel hardware
33
•
Vectorized and pipelined functional units. Note that the same operation is applied
to each element in the vector, or, in the case of operations like addition, the same
operation is applied to each pair of corresponding elements in the two vectors.
Thus vector operations are SIMD.
•
Vector instructions. These are instructions that operate on vectors rather than
scalars. If the vector length is vector_length, these instructions have the great
virtue that a simple loop such as
for
( i = 0;
i <
n ;
i++)
x [ i ] +=
y [ i ] ;
requires only a single load, add, and store for each block of vector_length el-
ements, while a conventional system requires a load, add, and store for each
element.
•
Interleaved memory. The memory system consists of multiple “banks” that can
be accessed more or less independently. After accessing one bank, there will be
a delay before it can be reaccessed, but a different bank can be accessed much
sooner. So if the elements of a vector are distributed across multiple banks, there
can be little to no delay in loading/storing successive elements.
•
Strided memory access and hardware scatter/gather. In strided memory access,
the program accesses elements of a vector located at ﬁxed intervals. For example,
accessing the ﬁrst element, the ﬁfth element, the ninth element, and so on would
be strided access with a stride of four. Scatter/gather (in this context) is writing
(scatter) or reading (gather) elements of a vector located at irregular intervals—
for example, accessing the ﬁrst element, the second element, the fourth element,
the eighth element, and so on. Typical vector systems provide special hardware to
accelerate strided access and scatter/gather.
Vector processors have the virtue that for many applications, they are very fast and
very easy to use. Vectorizing compilers are quite good at identifying code that can
be vectorized. Furthermore, they identify loops that cannot be vectorized, and they
often provide information about why a loop couldn’t be vectorized. The user can
thereby make informed decisions about whether it’s possible to rewrite the loop so
that it will vectorize. Vector systems have very high memory bandwidth, and every
data item that’s loaded is actually used, unlike cache-based systems that may not
make use of every item in a cache line. On the other hand, they don’t handle irregular
data structures as well as other parallel architectures, and there seems to be a very
ﬁnite limit to their scalability, that is, their ability to handle ever larger problems.
It’s difﬁcult to see how systems could be created that would operate on ever longer
vectors. Current generation systems usually scale by increasing the number of vector
processors, not the vector length. Current commodity systems provide limited support
for operations on very short vectors, while processors that operate on long vectors are
custom manufactured, and, consequently, very expensive.

34
CHAPTER 2 Parallel hardware and parallel software
Graphics processing units
Real-time graphics application programming interfaces, or APIs, use points, lines,
and triangles to internally represent the surface of an object. They use a graphics
processing pipeline to convert the internal representation into an array of pixels
that can be sent to a computer screen. Several of the stages of this pipeline are pro-
grammable. The behavior of the programmable stages is speciﬁed by functions called
shader functions. The shader functions are typically quite short—often just a few
lines of C code. They’re also implicitly parallel, since they can be applied to multiple
elements (e.g., vertices) in the graphics stream. Since the application of a shader func-
tion to nearby elements often results in the same ﬂow of control, GPUs can optimize
performance by using SIMD parallelism, and in the current generation all GPUs use
SIMD parallelism. This is obtained by including a large number of datapaths (e.g.,
128) on each GPU processing core.
Processing a single image can require very large amounts of data—hundreds of
megabytes of data for a single image is not unusual. GPUs therefore need to maintain
very high rates of data movement, and to avoid stalls on memory accesses, they rely
heavily on hardware multithreading; some systems are capable of storing the state of
more than a hundred suspended threads for each executing thread. The actual number
of threads depends on the amount of resources (e.g., registers) needed by the shader
function. A drawback here is that many threads processing a lot of data are needed to
keep the datapaths busy, and GPUs may have relatively poor performance on small
problems.
It should be stressed that GPUs are not pure SIMD systems. Although the data-
paths on a given core can use SIMD parallelism, current generation GPUs can run
more than one instruction stream on a single core. Furthermore, typical GPUs can
have dozens of cores, and these cores are also capable of executing independent in-
struction streams. So GPUs are neither purely SIMD nor purely MIMD.
Also note that GPUs can use shared or distributed memory. The largest systems
often use both: several cores may have access to a common block of memory, but
other SIMD cores may have access to a different block of shared memory, and two
cores with access to different blocks of shared memory may communicate over a
network. However, in the remainder of this text, we’ll limit our discussion to GPUs
that use shared memory.
GPUs are becoming increasingly popular for general, high-performance com-
puting, and several languages have been developed that allow users to exploit their
power. We’ll go into more detail on the architecture of Nvidia processors and how to
program them in Chapter 6. Also see [33].
2.3.3 MIMD systems
Multiple instruction, multiple data, or MIMD, systems support multiple simulta-
neous instruction streams operating on multiple data streams. Thus MIMD systems
typically consist of a collection of fully independent processing units or cores, each
of which has its own control unit and its own datapath. Furthermore, unlike SIMD

2.3 Parallel hardware
35
systems, MIMD systems are usually asynchronous, that is, the processors can oper-
ate at their own pace. In many MIMD systems, there is no global clock, and there may
be no relation between the system times on two different processors. In fact, unless
the programmer imposes some synchronization, even if the processors are executing
exactly the same sequence of instructions, at any given instant they may be executing
different statements.
As we noted in Chapter 1, there are two principal types of MIMD systems: shared-
memory systems and distributed-memory systems. In a shared-memory system a
collection of autonomous processors is connected to a memory system via an in-
terconnection network, and each processor can access each memory location. In a
shared-memory system, the processors usually communicate implicitly by accessing
shared data structures. In a distributed-memory system, each processor is paired
with its own private memory, and the processor-memory pairs communicate over
an interconnection network. So in distributed-memory systems, the processors usu-
ally communicate explicitly by sending messages or by using special functions that
provide access to the memory of another processor. See Figs. 2.3 and 2.4.
FIGURE 2.3
A shared-memory system.
FIGURE 2.4
A distributed-memory system.

36
CHAPTER 2 Parallel hardware and parallel software
Shared-memory systems
The most widely available shared-memory systems use one or more multicore pro-
cessors. As we discussed in Chapter 1, a multicore processor has multiple CPUs or
cores on a single chip. Typically, the cores have private level 1 caches, while other
caches may or may not be shared between the cores.
In shared-memory systems with multiple multicore processors, the interconnect
can either connect all the processors directly to main memory, or each processor can
have a direct connection to a block of main memory, and the processors can access
each other’s blocks of main memory through special hardware built into the proces-
sors. (See Figs. 2.5 and 2.6.) In the ﬁrst type of system, the time to access all the
memory locations will be the same for all the cores, while in the second type, a mem-
ory location to which a core is directly connected, can be accessed more quickly than
a memory location that must be accessed through another chip. Thus the ﬁrst type
of system is called a uniform memory access, or UMA, system, while the second
type is called a nonuniform memory access, or NUMA, system. UMA systems are
FIGURE 2.5
A UMA multicore system.
FIGURE 2.6
A NUMA multicore system.

2.3 Parallel hardware
37
usually easier to program, since the programmer doesn’t need to worry about dif-
ferent access times for different memory locations. This advantage can be offset by
the faster access to the directly connected memory in NUMA systems. Furthermore,
NUMA systems have the potential to use larger amounts of memory than UMA sys-
tems.
Distributed-memory systems
The most widely available distributed-memory systems are called clusters. They are
composed of a collection of commodity systems—for example, PCs—connected by
a commodity interconnection network—for example, Ethernet. In fact, the nodes of
these systems, the individual computational units joined together by the commu-
nication network, are usually shared-memory systems with one or more multicore
processors. To distinguish such systems from pure distributed-memory systems, they
are sometimes called hybrid systems. Nowadays, it’s usually understood that a clus-
ter has shared-memory nodes.
The grid provides the infrastructure necessary to turn large networks of geograph-
ically distributed computers into a uniﬁed distributed-memory system. In general,
such a system is heterogeneous, that is, the individual nodes are built from different
types of hardware.
2.3.4 Interconnection networks
The interconnect plays a decisive role in the performance of both distributed- and
shared-memory systems: even if the processors and memory have virtually unlimited
performance, a slow interconnect will seriously degrade the overall performance of
all but the simplest parallel program. See, for example, Exercise 2.11.
Although some of the interconnects have a great deal in common, there are
enough differences to make it worthwhile to treat interconnects for shared-memory
and distributed-memory separately.
Shared-memory interconnects
In the past, it was common for shared memory systems to use a bus to connect pro-
cessors and memory. Originally, a bus was a collection of parallel communication
wires together with some hardware that controls access to the bus. The key charac-
teristic of a bus is that the communication wires are shared by the devices that are
connected to it. Buses have the virtue of low cost and ﬂexibility; multiple devices
can be connected to a bus with little additional cost. However, since the communi-
cation wires are shared, as the number of devices connected to the bus increases, the
likelihood that there will be contention for use of the bus increases, and the expected
performance of the bus decreases. Therefore if we connect a large number of pro-
cessors to a bus, we would expect that the processors would frequently have to wait
for access to main memory. So, as the size of shared-memory systems has increased,
buses are being replaced by switched interconnects.

38
CHAPTER 2 Parallel hardware and parallel software
As the name suggests, switched interconnects use switches to control the routing
of data among the connected devices. A crossbar is a relatively simple and powerful
switched interconnect. The diagram in Fig. 2.7(a) shows a simple crossbar. The lines
are bidirectional communication links, the squares are cores or memory modules, and
the circles are switches.
The individual switches can assume one of the two conﬁgurations shown in
Fig. 2.7(b). With these switches and at least as many memory modules as proces-
sors, there will only be a conﬂict between two cores attempting to access memory if
the two cores attempt to simultaneously access the same memory module. For exam-
ple, Fig. 2.7(c) shows the conﬁguration of the switches if P1 writes to M4, P2 reads
from M3, P3 reads from M1, and P4 writes to M2.
Crossbars allow simultaneous communication among different devices, so they
are much faster than buses. However, the cost of the switches and links is relatively
high. A small bus-based system will be much less expensive than a crossbar-based
system of the same size.
Distributed-memory interconnects
Distributed-memory interconnects are often divided into two groups: direct inter-
connects and indirect interconnects. In a direct interconnect each switch is directly
connected to a processor-memory pair, and the switches are connected to each other.
Fig. 2.8 shows a ring and a two-dimensional toroidal mesh. As before, the circles
are switches, the squares are processors, and the lines are bidirectional links.
One of the simplest measures of the power of a direct interconnect is the number
of links. When counting links in a direct interconnect, it’s customary to count only
switch-to-switch links. This is because the speed of the processor-to-switch links
may be very different from the speed of the switch-to-switch links. Furthermore, to
get the total number of links, we can usually just add the number of processors to
the number of switch-to-switch links. So in the diagram for a ring (Fig. 2.8a), we
would ordinarily count 3 links instead of 6, and in the diagram for the toroidal mesh
(Fig. 2.8b), we would count 18 links instead of 27.
A ring is superior to a simple bus, since it allows multiple simultaneous commu-
nications. However, it’s easy to devise communication schemes, in which some of
the processors must wait for other processors to complete their communications. The
toroidal mesh will be more expensive than the ring, because the switches are more
complex—they must support ﬁve links instead of three—and if there are p proces-
sors, the number of links is 2p in a toroidal mesh, while it’s only p in a ring. However,
it’s not difﬁcult to convince yourself that the number of possible simultaneous com-
munications patterns is greater with a mesh than with a ring.
One measure of “number of simultaneous communications” or “connectivity” is
bisection width. To understand this measure, imagine that the parallel system is di-
vided into two halves, and each half contains half of the processors or nodes. How
many simultaneous communications can take place “across the divide” between the
halves? In Fig. 2.9(a) we’ve divided a ring with eight nodes into two groups of four
nodes, and we can see that only two communications can take place between the

2.3 Parallel hardware
39
FIGURE 2.7
(a) A crossbar switch connecting four processors (Pi) and four memory modules (Mj);
(b) conﬁguration of internal switches in a crossbar; (c) simultaneous memory accesses by
the processors.
halves. (To make the diagrams easier to read, we’ve grouped each node with its switch
in this and subsequent diagrams of direct interconnects.) However, in Fig. 2.9(b)
we’ve divided the nodes into two parts so that four simultaneous communications

40
CHAPTER 2 Parallel hardware and parallel software
FIGURE 2.8
(a) A ring and (b) a toroidal mesh.
FIGURE 2.9
Two bisections of a ring: (a) only two communications can take place between the halves
and (b) four simultaneous connections can take place.
can take place, so what’s the bisection width? The bisection width is supposed to
give a “worst-case” estimate, so the bisection width is two—not four.
An alternative way of computing the bisection width is to remove the minimum
number of links needed to split the set of nodes into two equal halves. The number
of links removed is the bisection width. If we have a square two-dimensional toroidal
mesh with p = q2 nodes (where q is even), then we can split the nodes into two
halves by removing the “middle” horizontal links and the “wraparound” horizontal
links. (See Fig. 2.10.) This suggests that the bisection width is at most 2q = 2√p. In

2.3 Parallel hardware
41
FIGURE 2.10
A bisection of a toroidal mesh.
fact, this is the smallest possible number of links, and the bisection width of a square
two-dimensional toroidal mesh is 2√p.
The bandwidth of a link is the rate at which it can transmit data. It’s usually
given in megabits or megabytes per second. Bisection bandwidth is often used as
a measure of network quality. It’s similar to bisection width. However, instead of
counting the number of links joining the halves, it sums the bandwidth of the links.
For example, if the links in a ring have a bandwidth of one billion bits per second,
then the bisection bandwidth of the ring will be two billion bits per second or 2000
megabits per second.
The ideal direct interconnect is a fully connected network, in which each switch
is directly connected to every other switch. See Fig. 2.11. Its bisection width is p2/4.
However, it’s impractical to construct such an interconnect for systems with more
than a few nodes, since it requires a total of p2/2 −p/2 links, and each switch
must be capable of connecting to p links. It is therefore more a “theoretical best
possible” interconnect than a practical one, and it is used as a basis for evaluating
other interconnects.
The hypercube is a highly connected direct interconnect that has been used in
actual systems. Hypercubes are built inductively: A one-dimensional hypercube is a
fully connected system with two processors. A two-dimensional hypercube is built
from two one-dimensional hypercubes by joining “corresponding” switches. Simi-
larly, a three-dimensional hypercube is built from two two-dimensional hypercubes.
(See Fig. 2.12.) Thus a hypercube of dimension d has p = 2d nodes, and a switch
in a d-dimensional hypercube is directly connected to a processor and d switches.
The bisection width of a hypercube is p/2, so it has more connectivity than a ring
or toroidal mesh, but the switches must be more powerful, since they must support
1 + d = 1 + log2(p) wires, while the mesh switches only require ﬁve wires. So a
hypercube with p nodes is more expensive to construct than a toroidal mesh.

42
CHAPTER 2 Parallel hardware and parallel software
FIGURE 2.11
A fully connected network.
FIGURE 2.12
(a) One-, (b) two-, and (c) three-dimensional hypercubes.
Indirect interconnects provide an alternative to direct interconnects. In an indi-
rect interconnect, the switches may not be directly connected to a processor. They’re
often shown with unidirectional links and a collection of processors, each of which
has an outgoing and an incoming link, and a switching network. (See Fig. 2.13.)
The crossbar and the omega network are relatively simple examples of indi-
rect networks. We saw a shared-memory crossbar with bidirectional links earlier
(Fig. 2.7). The diagram of a distributed-memory crossbar in Fig. 2.14 has unidirec-
tional links. Notice that as long as two processors don’t attempt to communicate with
the same processor, all the processors can simultaneously communicate with another
processor.
An omega network is shown in Fig. 2.15. The switches are two-by-two crossbars
(see Fig. 2.16). Observe that unlike the crossbar, there are communications that can-
not occur simultaneously. For example, in Fig. 2.15, if processor 0 sends a message
to processor 6, then processor 1 cannot simultaneously send a message to proces-
sor 7. On the other hand, the omega network is less expensive than the crossbar. The
omega network uses 1
2p log2(p) of the 2 × 2 crossbar switches, so it uses a total of
2p log2(p) switches, while the crossbar uses p2.

2.3 Parallel hardware
43
FIGURE 2.13
A generic indirect network.
FIGURE 2.14
A crossbar interconnect for distributed-memory.
It’s a little bit more complicated to deﬁne bisection width for indirect networks.
However, the principle is the same: we want to divide the nodes into two groups of
equal size and determine how much communication can take place between the two
halves, or alternatively, the minimum number of links that need to be removed so that
the two groups can’t communicate. The bisection width of a p × p crossbar is p, and
the bisection width of an omega network is p/2.
Latency and bandwidth
Any time data is transmitted, we’re interested in how long it will take for the data
to reach its destination. This is true whether we’re talking about transmitting data
between main memory and cache, cache and register, hard disk and memory, or be-
tween two nodes in a distributed-memory or hybrid system. There are two ﬁgures

44
CHAPTER 2 Parallel hardware and parallel software
FIGURE 2.15
An omega network.
FIGURE 2.16
A switch in an omega network.
that are often used to describe the performance of an interconnect (regardless of what
it’s connecting): the latency and the bandwidth. The latency is the time that elapses
between the source’s beginning to transmit the data and the destination’s starting to
receive the ﬁrst byte. The bandwidth is the rate at which the destination receives data
after it has started to receive the ﬁrst byte. So if the latency of an interconnect is l
seconds and the bandwidth is b bytes per second, then the time it takes to transmit a

2.3 Parallel hardware
45
message of n bytes is
message transmission time = l + n/b.
Beware, however, that these terms are often used in different ways. For example,
latency is sometimes used to describe total message transmission time. It’s also often
used to describe the time required for any ﬁxed overhead involved in transmitting
data. For example, if we’re sending a message between two nodes in a distributed-
memory system, a message is not just raw data. It might include the data to be
transmitted, a destination address, some information specifying the size of the mes-
sage, some information for error correction, and so on. So in this setting, latency
might be the time it takes to assemble the message on the sending side—the time
needed to combine the various parts—and the time to disassemble the message on
the receiving side (the time needed to extract the raw data from the message and
store it in its destination).
2.3.5 Cache coherence
Recall that CPU caches are managed by system hardware: programmers don’t have
direct control over them. This has several important consequences for shared-memory
systems. To understand these issues, suppose we have a shared-memory system with
two cores, each of which has its own private data cache. (See Fig. 2.17.) As long as
the two cores only read shared data, there is no problem. For example, suppose that
FIGURE 2.17
A shared-memory system with two cores and two caches.

46
CHAPTER 2 Parallel hardware and parallel software
x is a shared variable that has been initialized to 2, y0 is private and owned by core 0,
and y1 and z1 are private and owned by core 1. Now suppose the following statements
are executed at the indicated times:
Time
Core 0
Core 1
0
y0 = x;
y1 = 3*x;
1
x = 7;
Statement(s) not involving x
2
Statement(s) not involving x
z1 = 4*x;
Then the memory location for y0 will eventually get the value 2, and the memory
location for y1 will eventually get the value 6. However, it’s not so clear what value z1
will get. It might at ﬁrst appear that since core 0 updates x to 7 before the assignment
to z1, z1 will get the value 4 × 7 = 28. However, at time 0, x is in the cache of core 1.
So unless for some reason x is evicted from core 0’s cache and then reloaded into
core 1’s cache, it actually appears that the original value x = 2 may be used, and
z1 will get the value 4 × 2 = 8.
Note that this unpredictable behavior will occur regardless of whether the system
is using a write-through or a write-back policy. If it’s using a write-through policy, the
main memory will be updated by the assignment x = 7. However, this will have no
effect on the value in the cache of core 1. If the system is using a write-back policy,
the new value of x in the cache of core 0 probably won’t even be available to core 1
when it updates z1.
Clearly, this is a problem. The programmer doesn’t have direct control over when
the caches are updated, so her program cannot execute these apparently innocuous
statements and know what will be stored in z1. There are several problems here, but
the one we want to look at right now is that the caches we described for single pro-
cessor systems provide no mechanism for ensuring that when the caches of multiple
processors store the same variable, an update by one processor to the cached variable
is “seen” by the other processors. That is, that the cached value stored by the other
processors is also updated. This is called the cache coherence problem.
Snooping cache coherence
There are two main approaches to ensuring cache coherence: snooping cache coher-
ence and directory-based cache coherence. The idea behind snooping comes from
bus-based systems: When the cores share a bus, any signal transmitted on the bus can
be “seen” by all the cores connected to the bus. Thus when core 0 updates the copy
of x stored in its cache, if it also broadcasts this information across the bus, and if
core 1 is “snooping” the bus, it will see that x has been updated, and it can mark its
copy of x as invalid. This is more or less how snooping cache coherence works. The
principal difference between our description and the actual snooping protocol is that
the broadcast only informs the other cores that the cache line containing x has been
updated, not that x has been updated.
A couple of points should be made regarding snooping. First, it’s not essential that
the interconnect be a bus, only that it support broadcasts from each processor to all

2.3 Parallel hardware
47
the other processors. Second, snooping works with both write-through and write-back
caches. In principle, if the interconnect is shared—as with a bus—with write-through
caches, there’s no need for additional trafﬁc on the interconnect, since each core
can simply “watch” for writes. With write-back caches, on the other hand, an extra
communication is necessary, since updates to the cache don’t get immediately sent to
memory.
Directory-based cache coherence
Unfortunately, in large networks, broadcasts are expensive, and snooping cache co-
herence requires a broadcast every time a variable is updated. So snooping cache
coherence isn’t scalable, because for larger systems it will cause performance to de-
grade. For example, suppose we have a system with the basic distributed-memory
architecture (Fig. 2.4). However, the system provides a single address space for all
the memories. So, for example, core 0 can access the variable x stored in core 1’s
memory, by simply executing a statement such as y = x. (Of course, accessing the
memory attached to another core will be slower than accessing “local” memory, but
that’s another story.) Such a system can, in principle, scale to very large numbers
of cores. However, snooping cache coherence is clearly a problem, since a broad-
cast across the interconnect will be very slow relative to the speed of accessing local
memory.
Directory-based cache coherence protocols attempt to solve this problem
through the use of a data structure called a directory. The directory stores the status
of each cache line. Typically, this data structure is distributed; in our example, each
core/memory pair might be responsible for storing the part of the structure that spec-
iﬁes the status of the cache lines in its local memory. Thus when a line is read into,
say, core 0’s cache, the directory entry corresponding to that line would be updated,
indicating that core 0 has a copy of the line. When a variable is updated, the directory
is consulted, and the cache controllers of the cores that have that variable’s cache line
in their caches will invalidate those lines.
Clearly, there will be substantial additional storage required for the directory, but
when a cache variable is updated, only the cores storing that variable need to be
contacted.
False sharing
It’s important to remember that CPU caches are implemented in hardware, so they op-
erate on cache lines, not individual variables. This can have disastrous consequences
for performance. As an example, suppose we want to repeatedly call a function f(i,j)
and add the computed values into a vector:
i n t
i ,
j ,
m ,
n ;
double
y [ m ] ;
/∗
Assign
y = 0 ∗/
.
.
.

48
CHAPTER 2 Parallel hardware and parallel software
for
( i = 0;
i <
m ;
i++)
for
( j = 0;
j <
n ;
j++)
y [ i ] +=
f ( i , j ) ;
We can parallelize this by dividing the iterations in the outer loop among the cores.
If we have core_count cores, we might assign the ﬁrst m/core_count iterations to the
ﬁrst core, the next m/core_count iterations to the second core, and so on.
/∗
P r i v a t e
v a r i a b l e s
∗/
i n t
i ,
j ,
iter_count ;
/∗
Shared
v a r i a b l e s
i n i t i a l i z e d
by one
core
∗/
i n t
m ,
n ,
core_count
double
y [ m ] ;
iter_count =
m / core_count
/∗
Core 0 does
t h i s
∗/
for
( i = 0;
i <
iter_count ;
i++)
for
( j = 0;
j <
n ;
j++)
y [ i ] +=
f ( i , j ) ;
/∗
Core 1 does
t h i s
∗/
for
( i =
iter_count ;
i < 2∗iter_count ;
i++)
for
( j = 0;
j <
n ;
j++)
y [ i ] +=
f ( i , j ) ;
.
.
.
Now suppose our shared-memory system has two cores, m = 8, doubles are eight
bytes, cache lines are 64 bytes, and y[0] is stored at the beginning of a cache line.
A cache line can store eight doubles, and y takes one full cache line. What happens
when core 0 and core 1 simultaneously execute their codes? Since all of y is stored in
a single cache line, each time one of the cores executes the statement y[i] += f(i,j),
the line will be invalidated, and the next time the other core tries to execute this
statement, it will have to fetch the updated line from memory! So if n is large, we
would expect that a large percentage of the assignments y[i] += f(i,j) will access
main memory—in spite of the fact that core 0 and core 1 never access each other’s
elements of y. This is called false sharing, because the system is behaving as if the
elements of y were being shared by the cores.
Note that false sharing does not cause incorrect results. However, it can ruin the
performance of a program by causing many more accesses to main memory than
necessary. We can reduce its effect by using temporary storage that is local to the
thread or process, and then copying the temporary storage to the shared storage. We’ll
return to the subject of false sharing in Chapters 4 and 5.

2.4 Parallel software
49
2.3.6 Shared-memory vs. distributed-memory
Newcomers to parallel computing sometimes wonder why all MIMD systems aren’t
shared-memory, since most programmers ﬁnd the concept of implicitly coordinat-
ing the work of the processors through shared data structures more appealing than
explicitly sending messages. There are several issues, some of which we’ll discuss
when we talk about software for distributed- and shared-memory. However, the prin-
cipal hardware issue is the cost of scaling the interconnect. As we add processors to
a bus, the chance that there will be conﬂicts over access to the bus increase dramat-
ically, so buses are suitable for systems with only a few processors. Large crossbars
are very expensive, so it’s also unusual to ﬁnd systems with large crossbar intercon-
nects. On the other hand, distributed-memory interconnects, such as the hypercube
and the toroidal mesh, are relatively inexpensive, and distributed-memory systems
with thousands of processors that use these and other interconnects have been built.
Thus distributed-memory systems are often better suited for problems requiring vast
amounts of data or computation.
2.4 Parallel software
Parallel hardware has arrived. Virtually all desktop and server systems use mul-
ticore processors. Nowadays even mobile phones and tablets make use of mul-
ticore processors. The ﬁrst edition (2011) asserted, “The same cannot be said
for parallel software.” Currently (2021) the situation for parallel software is in
ﬂux. Most system software makes some use of parallelism, and many widely
used application programs (e.g., Excel, Photoshop, Chrome) can also use mul-
tiple cores. However, there are still many programs that can only make use of
a single core, and there are many programmers with no experience writing par-
allel programs. This is a problem, because we can no longer rely on hardware
and compilers to provide a steady increase in application performance. If we’re
to continue to have routine increases in application performance and application
power, software developers must learn to write applications that exploit shared- and
distributed-memory architectures and MIMD and SIMD systems. In this section,
we’ll take a look at some of the issues involved in writing software for parallel sys-
tems.
First, some terminology. Typically when we run our shared-memory programs,
we’ll start a single process and fork multiple threads. So when we discuss shared-
memory programs, we’ll talk about threads carrying out tasks. On the other hand,
when we run distributed-memory programs, we’ll start multiple processes, and we’ll
talk about processes carrying out tasks. When the discussion applies equally well to
shared-memory and distributed-memory systems, we’ll talk about processes/threads
carrying out tasks.

50
CHAPTER 2 Parallel hardware and parallel software
2.4.1 Caveats
Before proceeding, we need to stress some of the limitations of this section. First, we
stress that our coverage in this chapter is only meant to give some idea of the issues:
there is no attempt to be comprehensive.
Second, we’ll mainly focus on what’s often called single program, multiple
data, or SPMD, programs. Instead of running a different program on each core,
SPMD programs consist of a single executable that can behave as if it were multiple
different programs through the use of conditional branches. For example,
i f
( I ’m
thread / process
0)
do
this ;
else
do
that ;
Observe that SPMD programs can readily implement data-parallelism. For example,
i f
( I ’m
thread / process
0)
operate
on
the
first
half
of
the
array ;
else
/*
I ’m
thread / process 1 ∗/
operate
on
the
second
half
of
the
array ;
Recall that a program is task parallel if it obtains its parallelism by dividing tasks
among the threads or processes. The ﬁrst example makes it clear that SPMD programs
can also implement task-parallelism.
2.4.2 Coordinating the processes/threads
In a very few cases, obtaining excellent parallel performance is trivial. For example,
suppose we have two arrays and we want to add them:
double
x [ n ] ,
y [ n ] ;
.
.
.
for
( i n t
i = 0;
i <
n ;
i++)
x [ i ] +=
y [ i ] ;
To parallelize this, we only need to assign elements of the arrays to the pro-
cesses/threads. For example, if we have p processes/threads, we might make pro-
cess/thread 0 responsible for elements 0,...,n/p −1, process/thread 1 would be
responsible for elements n/p,...,2n/p −1, and so on.
So for this example, the programmer only needs to
1. Divide the work among the processes/threads in such a way that
a.
each process/thread gets roughly the same amount of work, and
b.
the amount of communication required is minimized.
Recall that the process of dividing the work among the processes/threads so that
(a) is satisﬁed is called load balancing. The two qualiﬁcations on dividing the
work are obvious, but nonetheless important. In many cases it won’t be necessary
to give much thought to them; they typically become concerns in situations in

2.4 Parallel software
51
which the amount of work isn’t known in advance by the programmer, but rather
the work is generated as the program runs.
Although we might wish for a term that’s a little easier to pronounce, recall that
the process of converting a serial program or algorithm into a parallel program is
often called parallelization. Programs that can be parallelized by simply dividing
the work among the processes/threads are sometimes said to be embarrassingly
parallel. This is a bit unfortunate, since it suggests that programmers should be
embarrassed to have written an embarrassingly parallel program, when, to the
contrary, successfully devising a parallel solution to any problem is a cause for
great rejoicing.
Alas, the vast majority of problems are much more determined to resist our efforts
to ﬁnd a parallel solution. As we saw in Chapter 1, for these problems, we need to
coordinate the work of the processes/threads. In these programs, we also usually
need to
2. Arrange for the processes/threads to synchronize.
3. Arrange for communication among the processes/threads.
These last two problems are often interrelated. For example, in distributed-memory
programs, we often implicitly synchronize the processes by communicating among
them, and in shared-memory programs, we often communicate among the threads by
synchronizing them. We’ll say more about both issues below.
2.4.3 Shared-memory
As we noted earlier, in shared-memory programs, variables can be shared or private.
Shared variables can be read or written by any thread, and private variables can ordi-
narily only be accessed by one thread. Communication among the threads is usually
done through shared variables, so communication is implicit rather than explicit.
Dynamic and static threads
In many environments, shared-memory programs use dynamic threads. In this
paradigm, there is often a master thread and at any given instant a (possibly empty)
collection of worker threads. The master thread typically waits for work requests—
for example, over a network—and when a new request arrives, it forks a worker
thread, the thread carries out the request, and when the thread completes the work,
it terminates and joins the master thread. This paradigm makes efﬁcient use of sys-
tem resources, since the resources required by a thread are only being used while the
thread is actually running.
An alternative to the dynamic paradigm is the static thread paradigm. In this
paradigm, all of the threads are forked after any needed setup by the master thread
and the threads run until all the work is completed. After the threads join the master
thread, the master thread may do some cleanup (e.g., free memory), and then it also
terminates. In terms of resource usage, this may be less efﬁcient: if a thread is idle,
its resources (e.g., stack, program counter, and so on) can’t be freed. However, fork-
ing and joining threads can be fairly time-consuming operations. So if the necessary

52
CHAPTER 2 Parallel hardware and parallel software
resources are available, the static thread paradigm has the potential for better perfor-
mance than the dynamic paradigm. It also has the virtue that it’s closer to the most
widely used paradigm for distributed-memory programming, so part of the mindset
that is used for one type of system is preserved for the other. Hence, we’ll often use
the static thread paradigm.
Nondeterminism
In any MIMD system in which the processors execute asynchronously it is likely that
there will be nondeterminism. A computation is nondeterministic if a given input
can result in different outputs. If multiple threads are executing independently, the
relative rate at which they’ll complete statements varies from run to run, and hence
the results of the program may be different from run to run. As a very simple example,
suppose we have two threads, one with ID or rank 0 and the other with ID or rank 1.
Suppose also that each is storing a private variable my_x, thread 0’s value for my_x is 7,
and thread 1’s is 19. Further, suppose both threads execute the following code:
.
.
.
printf ( " Thread
%d
>
my_x
=
% d \ n " ,
my_rank ,
my_x ) ;
.
.
.
Then the output could be
Thread 0 >
my_x = 7
Thread 1 >
my_x = 19
but it could also be
Thread 1 >
my_x = 19
Thread 0 >
my_x = 7
In fact, things could be even worse: the output of one thread could be broken up by
the output of the other thread. However, the point here is that because the threads are
executing independently and interacting with the operating system, the time it takes
for one thread to complete a block of statements varies from execution to execution,
so the order in which these statements complete can’t be predicted.
In many cases nondeterminism isn’t a problem. In our example, since we’ve la-
beled the output with the thread’s rank, the order in which the output appears probably
doesn’t matter. However, there are also many cases in which nondeterminism—
especially in shared-memory programs—can be disastrous, because it can easily
result in program errors. Here’s a simple example with two threads.
Suppose each thread computes an int, which it stores in a private variable my_val.
Suppose also that we want to add the values stored in my_val into a shared-memory
location x that has been initialized to 0. Both threads therefore want to execute code
that looks something like this:
my_val =
Compute_val ( my_rank ) ;
x +=
my_val ;

2.4 Parallel software
53
Now recall that an addition typically requires loading the two values to be added into
registers, adding the values, and ﬁnally storing the result. To keep things relatively
simple, we’ll assume that values are loaded from main memory directly into registers
and stored in main memory directly from registers. Here is one possible sequence of
events:
Time
Core 0
Core 1
0
Finish assignment to my_val
In call to Compute_val
1
Load x = 0 into register
Finish assignment to my_val
2
Load my_val = 7 into register
Load x = 0 into register
3
Add my_val = 7 to x
Load my_val = 19 into register
4
Store x = 7
Add my_val to x
5
Start other work
Store x = 19
Clearly this is not what we want, and it’s easy to imagine other sequences of
events that result in an incorrect value for x. The nondeterminism here is a result of
the fact that two threads are attempting to more or less simultaneously update the
memory location x. When threads or processes attempt to simultaneously access a
shared resource, and the accesses can result in an error, we often say the program
has a race condition, because the threads or processes are in a “race” to carry out
an operation. That is, the outcome of the computation depends on which thread wins
the race. In our example, the threads are in a race to execute x += my_val. In this case,
unless one thread completes x += my_val before the other thread starts, the result will
be incorrect. So we need for each thread’s operation x += my_val to be atomic. An
operation that writes to a memory location is atomic if, after a thread has completed
the operation, it appears that no other thread has modiﬁed the memory location. There
are usually several ways to ensure that an operation is atomic. One possibility is to
ensure that only one thread executes the update x += my_val at a time. A block of
code that can only be executed by one thread at a time is called a critical section,
and it’s usually our job as programmers to ensure mutually exclusive access to a
critical section. In other words, we need to ensure that if one thread is executing the
code in the critical section, then the other threads are excluded.
The most commonly used mechanism for ensuring mutual exclusion is a mutual
exclusion lock or mutex, or simply lock. A mutex is a special type of object that
has support in the underlying hardware. The basic idea is that each critical section
is protected by a lock. Before a thread can execute the code in the critical section, it
must “obtain” the mutex by calling a mutex function, and when it’s done executing
the code in the critical section, it should “relinquish” the mutex by calling an un-
lock function. While one thread “owns” the lock—that is, has returned from a call
to the lock function but hasn’t yet called the unlock function—any other thread at-
tempting to execute the code in the critical section will wait in its call to the lock
function.

54
CHAPTER 2 Parallel hardware and parallel software
Thus to ensure that our code functions correctly, we might modify it so that it
looks something like this:
my_val =
Compute_val ( my_rank ) ;
Lock(& add_my_val_lock ) ;
x +=
my_val ;
Unlock(& add_my_val_lock ) ;
This ensures that only one thread at a time can execute the statement x += my_val.
Note that the code does not impose any predetermined order on the threads. Either
thread 0 or thread 1 can execute x += my_val ﬁrst.
Also note that the use of a mutex enforces serialization of the critical section.
Since only one thread at a time can execute the code in the critical section, this code
is effectively serial. Thus we want our code to have as few critical sections as possible,
and we want our critical sections to be as short as possible.
There are alternatives to mutexes. In busy-waiting, a thread enters a loop, whose
sole purpose is to test a condition. In our example, suppose there is a shared variable
ok_for_1 that has been initialized to false. Then something like the following code
can ensure that thread 1 won’t update x until after thread 0 has updated it:
my_val =
Compute_val ( my_rank ) ;
i f
( my_rank == 1)
while
( ! ok_for_1 ) ;
/∗
Busy−wait
loop
∗/
x +=
my_val ;
/∗
C r i t i c a l
s e c t i o n
∗/
i f
( my_rank == 0)
ok_for_1 =
true ;
/∗
Let
thread 1 update
x
∗/
So until thread 0 executes ok_for_1 = true, thread 1 will be stuck in the loop
while (!ok_for_1). This loop is called a “busy-wait,” because the thread can be very
busy waiting for the condition. This has the virtue that it’s simple to understand and
implement. However, it can be very wasteful of system resources, because even when
a thread is doing no useful work, the core running the thread will be repeatedly check-
ing to see if the critical section can be entered. Semaphores are similar to mutexes,
although the details of their behavior are slightly different, and there are some types of
thread synchronization that are easier to implement with semaphores than mutexes.
A monitor provides mutual exclusion at a somewhat higher level: it is an object
whose methods can only be executed by one thread at a time. We’ll discuss busy-
waiting and semaphores in Chapter 4.
Thread safety
In many, if not most, cases, parallel programs can call functions developed for use in
serial programs, and there won’t be any problems. However, there are some notable
exceptions. The most important exception for C programmers occurs in functions that
make use of static local variables. Recall that ordinary C local variables—variables
declared inside a function—are allocated from the system stack. Since each thread
has its own stack, ordinary C local variables are private. However, recall that a static
variable that’s declared in a function persists from one call to the next. Thus static

2.4 Parallel software
55
variables are effectively shared among any threads that call the function, and this can
have unexpected and unwanted consequences.
For example, the C string library function strtok splits an input string into sub-
strings. When it’s ﬁrst called, it’s passed a string, and on subsequent calls it returns
successive substrings. This can be arranged through the use of a static char∗variable
that refers to the string that was passed on the ﬁrst call. Now suppose two threads are
splitting strings into substrings. Clearly, if, for example, thread 0 makes its ﬁrst call
to strtok, and then thread 1 makes its ﬁrst call to strtok before thread 0 has com-
pleted splitting its string, then thread 0’s string will be lost or overwritten, and, on
subsequent calls, it may get substrings of thread 1’s strings.
A function such as strtok is not thread safe. This means that if it is used in
a multithreaded program, there may be errors or unexpected results. When a block
of code isn’t thread safe, it’s usually because different threads are accessing shared
data. Thus, as we’ve seen, even though many serial functions can be used safely in
multithreaded programs—that is, they’re thread safe—programmers need to be wary
of functions that were written exclusively for use in serial programs. We’ll take a
closer look at thread safety in Chapters 4 and 5.
2.4.4 Distributed-memory
In distributed-memory programs, the cores can directly access only their own, private
memories. There are several APIs that are used. However, by far the most widely used
is message-passing. So we’ll devote most of our attention in this section to message-
passing. Then we’ll take a brief look at a couple of other, less widely used, APIs.
Perhaps the ﬁrst thing to note regarding distributed-memory APIs is that they can
be used with shared-memory hardware. It’s perfectly feasible for programmers to
logically partition shared-memory into private address spaces for the various threads,
and a library or compiler can implement the communication that’s needed.
As we noted earlier, distributed-memory programs are usually executed by start-
ing multiple processes rather than multiple threads. This is because typical “threads
of execution” in a distributed-memory program may run on independent CPUs with
independent operating systems, and there may be no software infrastructure for start-
ing a single “distributed” process and having that process fork one or more threads
on each node of the system.
Message-passing
A message-passing API provides (at a minimum) a send and a receive function. Pro-
cesses typically identify each other by ranks in the range 0,1,...,p −1, where p is
the number of processes. So, for example, process 1 might send a message to pro-
cess 0 with the following pseudocode:
char
message [ 1 0 0 ] ;
.
.
.
my_rank =
Get_rank ( ) ;
i f
( my_rank == 1) {

56
CHAPTER 2 Parallel hardware and parallel software
sprintf ( message ,
" Greetings
from
process
1 " ) ;
Send ( message ,
MSG_CHAR ,
100 ,
0 ) ;
}
e l s e
i f
( my_rank == 0) {
Receive ( message ,
MSG_CHAR ,
100 ,
1 ) ;
printf ( " Process
0
>
Received :
% s \ n " ,
message ) ;
}
Here the Get_rank function returns the calling process’s rank. Then the processes
branch depending on their ranks. Process 1 creates a message with sprintf from the
standard C library and then sends it to process 0 with the call to Send. The argu-
ments to the call are, in order, the message, the type of the elements in the message
(MSG_CHAR), the number of elements in the message (100), and the rank of the des-
tination process (0). On the other hand, process 0 calls Receive with the following
arguments: the variable into which the message will be received (message), the type
of the message elements, the number of elements available for storing the message,
and the rank of the process sending the message. After completing the call to Receive,
process 0 prints the message.
Several points are worth noting here. First, note that the program segment is
SPMD. The two processes are using the same executable, but carrying out different
actions. In this case, what they do depends on their ranks. Second, note that the vari-
able message refers to different blocks of memory on the different processes. Program-
mers often stress this by using variable names, such as my_message or local_message.
Finally, note that we’re assuming that process 0 can write to stdout. This is usually
the case: most implementations of message-passing APIs allow all processes access
to stdout and stderr—even if the API doesn’t explicitly provide for this. We’ll talk a
little more about I/O later on.
There are several possibilities for the exact behavior of the Send and Receive func-
tions, and most message-passing APIs provide several different send and/or receive
functions. The simplest behavior is for the call to Send to block until the call to
Receive starts receiving the data. This means that the process calling Send won’t re-
turn from the call until the matching call to Receive has started. Alternatively, the Send
function may copy the contents of the message into storage that it owns, and then it
will return as soon as the data are copied. The most common behavior for the Receive
function is for the receiving process to block until the message is received. There
are other possibilities for both Send and Receive, and we’ll discuss some of them in
Chapter 3.
Typical message-passing APIs also provide a wide variety of additional functions.
For example, there may be functions for various “collective” communications, such
as a broadcast, in which a single process transmits the same data to all the pro-
cesses, or a reduction, in which results computed by the individual processes are
combined into a single result—for example, values computed by the processes are
added. There may also be special functions for managing processes and communi-
cating complicated data structures. The most widely used API for message-passing
is the Message-Passing Interface or MPI. We’ll take a closer look at it in Chapter 3.
Message-passing is a very powerful and versatile API for developing parallel pro-
grams. Virtually all of the programs that are run on the most powerful computers in

2.4 Parallel software
57
the world use message-passing. However, it is also very low level. That is, there is
a huge amount of detail that the programmer needs to manage. For example, to par-
allelize a serial program, it is usually necessary to rewrite the vast majority of the
program. The data structures in the program may have to either be replicated by each
process or be explicitly distributed among the processes. Furthermore, the rewriting
usually can’t be done incrementally. For example, if a data structure is used in many
parts of the program, distributing it for the parallel parts and collecting it for the serial
(unparallelized) parts will probably be prohibitively expensive. Therefore message-
passing is sometimes called “the assembly language of parallel programming,” and
there have been many attempts to develop other distributed-memory APIs.
One-sided communication
In message-passing, one process must call a send function, and the send must be
matched by another process’s call to a receive function. Any communication requires
the explicit participation of two processes. In one-sided communication, or remote
memory access, a single process calls a function, which updates either local mem-
ory with a value from another process or remote memory with a value from the
calling process. This can simplify communication, since it only requires the active
participation of a single process. Furthermore, it can signiﬁcantly reduce the cost of
communication by eliminating the overhead associated with synchronizing two pro-
cesses. It can also reduce overhead by eliminating the overhead of one of the function
calls (send or receive).
It should be noted that some of these advantages may be hard to realize in prac-
tice. For example, if process 0 is copying a value into the memory of process 1,
0 must have some way of knowing when it’s safe to copy, since it will overwrite
some memory location. Process 1 must also have some way of knowing when the
memory location has been updated. The ﬁrst problem can be solved by synchroniz-
ing the two processes before the copy, and the second problem can be solved by
another synchronization, or by having a “ﬂag” variable that process 0 sets after it
has completed the copy. In the latter case, process 1 may need to poll the ﬂag vari-
able to determine that the new value is available. That is, it must repeatedly check
the ﬂag variable until it gets the value indicating 0 has completed its copy. Clearly,
these problems can considerably increase the overhead associated with transmitting
a value. A further difﬁculty is that since there is no explicit interaction between the
two processes, remote memory operations can introduce errors that are very hard to
track down.
Partitioned global address space languages
Since many programmers ﬁnd shared-memory programming more appealing than
message-passing or one-sided communication, a number of groups are developing
parallel programming languages that allow the user to use some shared-memory tech-
niques for programming distributed-memory hardware. This isn’t quite as simple as
it sounds. If we simply wrote a compiler that treated the collective memories in a
distributed-memory system as a single large memory, our programs would have poor,

58
CHAPTER 2 Parallel hardware and parallel software
or, at best, unpredictable performance, since each time a running process accessed
memory, it might access local memory—that is, memory belonging to the core on
which it was executing—or remote memory, memory belonging to another core. Ac-
cessing remote memory can take hundreds or even thousands of times longer than
accessing local memory. As an example, consider the following pseudocode for a
shared-memory vector addition:
shared
i n t
n = .
.
.
;
shared
double
x [ n ] ,
y [ n ] ;
private
i n t
i ,
my_first_element ,
my_last_element ;
my_first_element = .
.
.
;
my_last_element = .
.
.
;
/∗
I n i t i a l i z e
x and y
∗/
.
.
.
for
( i =
my_first_element ;
i <=
my_last_element ;
i++)
x [ i ] +=
y [ i ] ;
We ﬁrst declare two shared arrays. Then, on the basis of the process’s rank, we de-
termine which elements of the array “belong” to which process. After initializing the
arrays, each process adds its assigned elements. If the assigned elements of x and y
have been allocated so that the elements assigned to each process are in the memory
attached to the core the process is running on, then this code should be very fast.
However, if, for example, all of x is assigned to core 0 and all of y is assigned to
core 1, then the performance is likely to be terrible, since each time the assignment
x[i] += y[i] is executed, the process will need to refer to remote memory.
Partitioned global address space, or PGAS, languages provide some of the
mechanisms of shared-memory programs. However, they provide the programmer
with tools to avoid the problem we just discussed. Private variables are allocated in
the local memory of the core on which the process is executing, and the distribution
of the data in shared data structures is controlled by the programmer. So, for example,
she knows which elements of a shared array are in which process’s local memory.
There are several projects currently working on the development of PGAS lan-
guages. See, for example, [8,54].
2.4.5 GPU programming
GPUs are usually not “standalone” processors. They don’t ordinarily run an operating
system and system services, such as direct access to secondary storage. So program-
ming a GPU also involves writing code for the CPU “host” system, which runs on an
ordinary CPU. The memory for the CPU host and the GPU memory are usually sep-
arate. So the code that runs on the host typically allocates and initializes storage on
both the CPU and the GPU. It will start the program on the GPU, and it is responsible
for the output of the results of the GPU program. Thus GPU programming is really
heterogeneous programming, since it involves programming two different types of
processors.
