Computer Networks (BCS502) 
Department of CSE, CEC                                                                                                                                           1 
 
 
Module 5 
Introduction to Application layer 
Introduction 
The application layer provides services to the user. Communication is provided using a logical 
connection, which means that the two application layers assume that there is an imaginary direct 
connection through which they can send and receive messages. Figure shows the idea behind this 
logical connection. 
 
Providing Services 
Before the Internet, communication networks like the telephone network were designed for 
specific services, such as voice communication. Over time, users adapted these networks to 
provide additional services, like fax, by adding extra hardware. 
The Internet, similarly designed to serve global users, is more adaptable due to the layered 
structure of the TCP/IP protocol suite. Each layer in this suite can add or replace protocols, as 

Computer Networks (BCS502) 
Department of CSE, CEC                                                                                                                                           2 
 
 
long as they work with the protocols in the layers below. This flexibility supports the evolving 
nature of the Internet. 
The application layer, at the top, differs because it only receives services from the transport layer 
without needing to support other layers. This makes it easy to add or remove application 
protocols as long as they can work with the transport layer. This flexibility allows the Internet to 
continually expand with new application protocols, which has been a constant feature of its 
growth since its inception. 
Standard and Nonstandard Protocols 
For smooth Internet operation, the protocols in the first four layers of the TCP/IP suite need to be 
standardized and documented. These standard protocols are typically part of operating systems 
like Windows or UNIX. However, the application-layer protocols can be both standard and 
nonstandard for added flexibility. 
Standard Application-Layer Protocols-Standard application-layer protocols are well-
documented and standardized by Internet authorities. They are widely used in daily Internet 
interactions. 
Nonstandard Application-Layer Protocols-Programmers can also create nonstandard (or 
proprietary) application-layer programs by developing two programs that provide services 
through the transport layer. 
Application-Layer Paradigms 
To use the Internet, two application programs must communicate: one on a computer somewhere 
in the world and the other on a different computer. These programs exchange messages over the 
Internet, but their relationship can vary. There are two main paradigms: 
1. Client-Server Paradigm: One program (client) requests services, while the other 
(server) provides services. 
2. Peer-to-Peer (P2P) Paradigm: Both programs can request and provide services. 
Traditional Paradigm: Client-Server 
➔ In client-server architecture, there is an always-on host, called the server, which 
provides services when it receives requests from many other hosts, called clients. 
➔ Example: In Web application Web server services requests from browsers running on 
client hosts. When a Web server receives a request for an object from a client host, it 
responds by sending the requested object to the client host. 

Computer Networks (BCS502) 
Department of CSE, CEC                                                                                                                                           3 
 
 
➔ In client-server architecture, clients do not directly communicate with each other. 
➔ The server has a fixed, well-known address, called an IP address. Because the server 
has a fixed, well-known address, and is always on, a client can always contact the 
server by sending a packet to the server’s IP address. 
➔ Some of the better-known applications with client-server architecture include the Web, 
FTP, Telnet, and e-mail. 
➔ The most popular Internet services—such as search engines (e.g., Google and Bing), 
Internet commerce (e.g., Amazon and e-Bay), Web-based email (e.g., Gmail and 
Yahoo Mail), social networking (e.g., Facebook and Twitter)— employ one or more 
data centers. 
 
 
New Paradigm: Peer-to-Peer 
➔ In P2P architecture, there is minimal dependence on dedicated servers in data centers. 
➔ The application employs direct communication between pairs of intermittently 
connected hosts, called peers. 
➔ The peers are not owned by the service provider, but are instead desktops and laptops 
controlled by users, with most of the peers residing in homes, universities, and offices. 
➔ Many of today’s most popular and traffic-intensive applications are based on P2P 
architectures. These applications include file sharing (e.g., BitTorrent), Internet 
Telephony (e.g., Skype), and IPTV (e.g., Kankan and PPstream). 
 
 

Computer Networks (BCS502) 
Department of CSE, CEC                                                                                                                                           4 
 
 
Mixed Paradigm  
An application may choose to use a mixture of the two paradigms by combining the advantages 
of both. For example, a light-load client-server communication can be used to find the address of 
the peer that can offer a service. When the address of the peer is found, the actual service can be 
received from the peer by using the peer-to -peer paradigm. 
CLIENT-SERVER PROGRAMMING 
In a client-server paradigm, communication at the application layer is between two running 
application programs called processes: a client and a server. The client is the program that 
initiates communication by sending a request, while the server is a program that waits for 
incoming requests, processes them, and returns a response. This setup requires that the server be 
running when a client request arrives, whereas the client only runs as needed. In practice, this 
means a client process can run on one computer and the server on another, but the server must be 
started first to be available for client requests.  
Application Programming Interface 
The interface between the application layer and the transport layer within a host which is also 
referred to as the Application Programming Interface (API). 
An API acts as a bridge between two parts: the application layer process (the program) and the 
operating system, which manages the first four layers of the TCP/IP protocol suite. Essentially, 
the computer’s operating system includes these first four layers and an API so that applications 
can communicate through the Internet. This way, applications can easily send and receive 
messages by using the services of the operating system. te with the operating system when 
sending and receiving messages through the Internet. Several APIs have been designed for 
communication. Three among them are common: socket interface, Transport Layer Interface 
(TLI), and STREAM.  
 

Computer Networks (BCS502) 
Department of CSE, CEC                                                                                                                                           5 
 
 
 
Sockets 
A process sends messages into, and receives messages from, the network through a software 
interface called a socket. The application at the sending side pushes messages through the 
socket. At the other side of the socket, the transport-layer protocol has the responsibility of 
getting the messages to the socket of the receiving process 
 
Socket Addresses  
The interaction between a client and a server is two-way communication. In a two-way 
communication, we need a pair of addresses: local (sender) and remote (receiver). The local 
address in one direction is the remote address in the other direction and vice versa. Since 
communication in the client-server paradigm is between two sockets, we need a pair of socket 
addresses for communication: a local socket address and a remote socket address. 
To identify the receiving process, two pieces of information need to be specified: 
The address of the host 
An identifier that specifies the receiving process in the destination host. 
In the Internet, the host is identified by its IP address. 
In addition to knowing the address of the host to which a message is destined, the sending 
process must also identify the receiving process running in the host.  
A destination port number serves this purpose. Popular applications have been assigned 
specific port numbers.  
For example, a Web server is identified by port number 80. A mail server process (using the 
SMTP protocol) is identified by port number 25. 
 
 

Computer Networks (BCS502) 
Department of CSE, CEC                                                                                                                                           6 
 
 
Using Services of the Transport Layer 
A pair of processes provide services to the users of the Internet, human or programs. A pair of 
processes, however, need to use the services provided by the transport layer for communication 
because there is no physical communication at the application layer. There are three common 
transport-layer protocols in the TCP/IP suite: UDP, TCP, and SCTP.  
UDP Protocol  
UDP is a connectionless, unreliable protocol that treats each message as an independent 
datagram with no connection between them. It doesn’t guarantee delivery or retransmission of 
lost data but is fast and simple. UDP is ideal for applications that prioritize speed over reliability, 
like some management and multimedia apps. 
TCP Protocol  
TCP (Transmission Control Protocol) provides a connection-oriented, reliable, byte-stream 
service. It first establishes a logical connection between two ends through a handshaking process, 
setting parameters like packet size and buffer size. Data is then exchanged in segments, with byte 
numbering to ensure continuity. If bytes are lost or corrupted, TCP allows the receiver to request 
retransmission, making it reliable. TCP also supports flow and congestion control. However, 
TCP is not message-oriented and does not define boundaries in messages. Applications needing 
reliability and capable of handling long messages benefit from TCP. 
SCTP Protocol  
SCTP provides a service which is a combination of the two other protocols. Like TCP, SCTP 
provides a connection-oriented, reliable service, but it is not byte stream oriented. It is a 
message-oriented protocol like UDP. In addition, SCTP can provide multi-stream service by 
providing multiple network-layer connections. SCTP is normally suitable for any application that 
needs reliability and at the same time needs to remain connected, even if a failure occurs in one 
network-layer connection. 
Iterative Communication Using UDP 
Communication between a client program and a server program can occur iteratively or 
concurrently. Although several client programs can access the same server program at the same 
time, the server program can be designed to respond iteratively or concurrently. An iterative 
server can process one client request at a time; it receives a request, processes it, and sends the 
response to the requestor before handling another request. When the server is handling the 
request from a client, the requests from other clients, and even other requests from the same 

Computer Networks (BCS502) 
Department of CSE, CEC                                                                                                                                           7 
 
 
client, need to be queued at the server site and wait for the server to be freed. The received and 
queued requests are handled in the first-in, first-out fashion. 
Sockets Used for UDP 
In UDP communication, the client and server use only one socket each. The socket created at the 
server site lasts forever; the socket created at the client site is closed (destroyed) when the client 
process terminates. Figure shows the lifetime of the sockets in the server and client processes. 
This is logical, because the server does know its own socket address, but does not know the 
socket addresses of the clients who need its services; it needs to wait for the client to connect 
before filling this part of the socket address. 
 
 
Flow Diagram  
UDP provides a connectionless service, in which a client sends a request and the server sends 
back a response. Figure shows a simplified flow diagram for iterative communication. There are 
multiple clients, but only one server. Each client is served in each iteration of the loop in the 
server. if a client wants to send two datagrams, it is considered as two clients for the server. The 
second datagram needs to wait for its turn. The diagram also shows the status of the socket after 
each action. 
 

Computer Networks (BCS502) 
Department of CSE, CEC                                                                                                                                           8 
 
 
 
Server Process 
The server makes a passive open, in which it becomes ready for the communication, but it waits 
until a client process makes the connection. It creates an empty socket. It then binds the socket to 
the server and the well-know port, in which only part of the socket (the server socket address) is 
filled (binding can happen at the time of creation depending on the underlying language). The 
server then issues a receive request command, blocking it from doing anything else until a client 
request arrives. 
When a client request is received, the server fills in the remaining socket information (the 
client’s address), processes the request, and sends the response back to the client. After this, the 
server clears the client’s address in the socket and waits for the next request in a continuous loop. 
Each time, the socket is only fully filled when a new request comes in. 
Client Process  
The client process makes an active open. In other words, it starts a connection. It creates an 
empty socket and then issues the send command, which fully fills the socket, and sends the 
request. The client then issues a receive command, which is blocked until a response arrives 
from the server. The response is then handled and the socket is destroyed. 

Computer Networks (BCS502) 
Department of CSE, CEC                                                                                                                                           9 
 
 
Iterative Communication Using TCP 
TCP is a connection-oriented protocol. Before sending or receiving data, a connection needs to 
be established between the client and the server. After the connection is established, the two 
parties can send and receive chunks of data as long as they have data to do so. 
Sockets Used in TCP  
The TCP server uses two different sockets, one for connection establishment and the other for 
data transfer. We call the first one the listen socket and the second the socket. The reason for 
having two types of sockets is to separate the connection phase from the data exchange phase. A 
server uses a listen socket to listen for a new client trying to establish connection. After the 
connection is established, the server creates a socket to exchange data with the client and finally 
to terminate the connection. The client uses only one socket for both connection establishment 
and data exchange. 
 
Flow Diagram  
Figure below shows a simplified flow diagram for iterative communication using TCP. There are 
multiple clients, but only one server. Each client is served in each iteration of the loop.  
 
 

Computer Networks (BCS502) 
Department of CSE, CEC                                                                                                                                           10 
 
 
 
Server Process 
• 
The TCP server creates a listening socket and binds it to a network address and port, used 
only for listening to incoming client connections. 
• 
The server calls a "listen" function, allowing the operating system to accept connections 
and add them to a waiting list. 
• 
The server enters a loop, handling each client one at a time. 
• 
In each loop iteration, the server uses the "accept" function to pick a client from the 
waiting list; if no clients are waiting, the server blocks until a client arrives. 
• 
Upon accepting a client, a new socket is created specifically for data exchange with that 
client. 
• 
The server sets this new socket with the client’s address for direct communication. 
• 
The server and client can then exchange data using this client-specific socket. 
 
Client Process 
The client flow diagram is almost similar to the UDP version except that the client  data-transfer 
box needs to be defined for each specific case. 

Computer Networks (BCS502) 
Department of CSE, CEC                                                                                                                                           11 
 
 
Standard Client-Server Protocols 
WORLD WIDE WEB AND HTTP 
World Wide Web  
• The idea of the Web was first proposed by Tim Berners-Lee in 1989 at CERN†, the 
European Organization for Nuclear Research, to allow several researchers at different 
locations throughout Europe to access each other’s’ researches.  
• The commercial Web started in the early 1990s.  
• 
Today, the Web is a global information space, where documents (called web pages) are 
spread across the world and connected through links. 
• 
The Web’s growth and popularity are tied to two key ideas: "distributed" and "linked." 
o Distributed: Any web server worldwide can add new pages, which helps expand 
the Web without overwhelming a few servers. 
o Linked: Web pages can reference other pages on different servers, creating a 
network of interconnected information. 
• 
This linking is done through hypertext, a concept from before the Internet. It allows a 
document to automatically access another linked document. The Web made this possible 
electronically by letting users click a link to retrieve a connected document. 
• 
The term hypertext evolved to hypermedia, meaning web pages can include not only 
text but also images, audio, and video. 
• 
The Web’s purpose has grown beyond sharing documents; it now supports online 
shopping, gaming, and on-demand access to radio and TV programs. 
Architecture 
The WWW today is a distributed client-server service, in which a client using a browser can 
access a service using a server. However, the service provided is distributed over many locations 
called sites. Each site holds one or more web pages. A web page can be simple or composite. A 
simple web page has no links to other web pages; a composite web page has one or more links to 
other web pages. Each web page is a file with a name and address. 
 

Computer Networks (BCS502) 
Department of CSE, CEC                                                                                                                                           12 
 
 
Web Client (Browser)  
A variety of vendors offer commercial browsers that interpret and display a web page, and all of 
them use nearly the same architecture. Each browser usually consists of three parts: a controller, 
client protocols, and interpreters. 
 
• The controller receives input from the keyboard or the mouse and uses the client 
programs to access the document.  
• After the document has been accessed, the controller uses one of the interpreters to 
display the document on the screen.  
• The client protocol can be one of the protocols described later, such as HTTP or FTP.  
• The interpreter can be HTML, Java, or JavaScript, depending on the type of document.  
• Some commercial browsers include Internet Explorer, Netscape Navigator, and Firefox. 
 
Web Server  
• The web page is stored at the server. Each time a request arrives, the corresponding 
document is sent to the client.  
• To improve efficiency, servers normally store requested files in a cache in memory; 
memory is faster to access than a disk.  
• A server can also become more efficient through multithreading or multiprocessing. In 
this case, a server can answer more than one request at a time. 
•  Some popular web servers include Apache and Microsoft Internet Information Server. 
 
Uniform Resource Locator (URL) 
A web page, as a file, needs to have a unique identifier to distinguish it from other web pages. 
To define a web page, four main parts are needed: 
1. Protocol: This is like choosing the "vehicle" or method to reach the web page. 
Commonly, this is HTTP (HyperText Transfer Protocol), which lets the browser access 
and display web pages. However, other methods, like FTP (File Transfer Protocol), can 
also be used for different types of access. 
2. Host: The host tells us where the web page is stored. It can be written as an IP address 
(e.g., 64.23.56.17) or as a domain name, like "example.com," which makes it easier to 
identify servers. 
3. Port: The port number is a specific “entry point” on the server. For example, port 80 is 
usually used for HTTP, while HTTPS uses port 443. Most of the time, the port is 

Computer Networks (BCS502) 
Department of CSE, CEC                                                                                                                                           13 
 
 
standard and doesn’t need to be written, but if a different port is used, it can be specified 
in the address. 
4. Path: The path gives the exact location of the web page file within the server. It shows 
the series of folders and the file name, like “/folder1/folder2/filename.” This tells the 
server exactly where to look to find and deliver the web page. 
 
When we put these four elements together, we get a URL (Uniform Resource Locator), which 
is the complete address that uniquely identifies and fetches a specific web page. Each part is 
separated to create a clear structure for finding the page. 
 
 
 
Example   
The URL http://www.mhhe.com/compsci/forouzan/ defines the web page related to one of the  
authors of this book. The string www.mhhe.com is the name of the computer in the McGraw-Hill  
company (the three letters www are part of the host name and are added to the commercial host).  
The path is compsci/forouzan/, which defines Forouzan’s web page under the directory compsci  
(computer science). 
 
Web Documents  
The documents in the WWW can be grouped into three broad categories: static, dynamic, and 
active 
 
Static Documents  
Static documents are fixed-content documents that are created and stored in a server. When a 
client accesses the document, a copy of the document is sent. The user can then use a browser to 
see the document. Static documents are prepared using one of several languages: HyperText 
Markup Language (HTML), Extensible Markup Language (XML), Extensible Style Language 
(XSL), and Extensible Hypertext Markup Language (XHTML). 
 
Dynamic Documents  
A dynamic document is created by a web server whenever a browser requests the document. 
When a request arrives, the web server runs an application program or a script that creates the 
dynamic document. The server returns the result of the program or script as a response to the 
browser that requested the document. Because a fresh document is created for each request, the 
contents of a dynamic document may vary from one request to another. A very simple example 
of a dynamic document is the retrieval of the time and date from a server. 
 
Active Documents 
Active documents are files that require a program or script to run on the client’s device to enable 
interactive or animated content on the user's screen. When a browser requests an active 

Computer Networks (BCS502) 
Department of CSE, CEC                                                                                                                                           14 
 
 
document, the server sends a copy of the file to the client. The document is then run by the 
client’s browser, allowing animations and interactions to occur locally on the user’s device. 
Active Documents are created using two methods 
1. Java Applets: Written in Java and compiled into bytecode (binary format). Ready to run 
on the client’s device. 
2. JavaScript: Scripts that are downloaded from the server and executed directly by the 
client’s browser. 
These methods enable dynamic, interactive content directly on the client’s device, making it 
possible for applications like animations and user interactions to work smoothly at the client 
side. 
 
HyperText Transfer Protocol (HTTP)  
⮚ The Hyper Text Transfer Protocol (HTTP), the Web’s application-layer protocol, is 
at the heart of the Web. 
⮚ HTTP is implemented in two programs: a client program and a server program. The 
client program and server program, executing on different end systems, talk to each 
other by exchanging HTTP messages. HTTP defines the structure of these messages 
and how the client and server exchange the messages. 
⮚ A Web page consists of objects. An object is simply a file like HTML file, a JPEG 
image, a Java applet, or a video clip—that is addressable by a single URL. 
⮚ Most Web pages consist of a base HTML file and several referenced objects.  
⮚ The base HTML file references the other objects in the page with the objects’ URLs. 
⮚ HTTP defines how Web clients request Web pages from Web servers and how 
servers transfer Web pages to clients. 
⮚ When a user requests a Web page (for example, clicks on a hyperlink), the browser 
sends HTTP request messages for the objects in the page to the server. The server 
receives the requests and responds with HTTP response messages that contain the 
objects. 
⮚ HTTP uses TCP as its underlying transport protocol. The HTTP client first initiates a 
TCP connection with the server. Once the connection is established, the browser and 
the server processes access TCP through their socket interfaces 
 
Non-Persistent and Persistent Connections 
If Separate TCP connection is used for each request and response, then the connection is said 
to be non-persistent.  
If same TCP connection is used for series of related request and response, then the connection 
is said to be persistent. 

Computer Networks (BCS502) 
Department of CSE, CEC                                                                                                                                           15 
 
 
Nonpersistent Connections  
In a nonpersistent connection, one TCP connection is made for each request/response. The 
following lists the steps in this strategy:  
1. The client opens a TCP connection and sends a request.  
2. The server sends the response and closes the connection.  
3. The client reads the data until it encounters an end-of-file marker; it then closes the  
connection.  
In this strategy, if a file contains links to N different pictures in different files (all located on the 
same server), the connection must be opened and closed N + 1 times. The nonpersistent strategy 
imposes high overhead on the server because the server needs N + 1 different buffers each time a 
connection is opened. 
 
 
⮚ Round-trip time (RTT) is the time it takes for a small packet to travel from client to server 
and then back to the client. 
⮚ The RTT includes packet-propagation delays, packet queuing delays in intermediate 
routers and switches, and packet-processing delays. 
⮚ When a user clicks on a hyperlink, the browser initiates a TCP connection between the 
browser and the Web server; this involves a “three-way handshake”—the client sends a 
small TCP segment to the server, the server acknowledges and responds with a small TCP 
segment, and, finally, the client acknowledges back to the server. 

Computer Networks (BCS502) 
Department of CSE, CEC                                                                                                                                           16 
 
 
⮚ The first two parts of the three-way handshake take one RTT. 
⮚ After completing the first two parts of the handshake, the client sends the HTTP request 
message combined with the third part of the three-way handshake (the acknowledgment) 
into the TCP connection. 
⮚ Once the request message arrives at the server, the server sends the HTML file into the 
TCP connection. This HTTP request/response eats up another RTT. Thus, roughly, the 
total response time is two RTTs plus the transmission time at the server of the HTML file. 
 
Persistent Connections 
HTTP version 1.1 specifies a persistent connection by default. Non-persistent connections 
have some shortcomings. 
1. A brand-new connection must be established and maintained for each requested object. 
This can place a significant burden on the Web server, which may be serving requests 
from hundreds of different clients simultaneously. 
2. Each object suffers a delivery delay of two RTTs— one RTT to establish the TCP 
connection and one RTT to request and receive an object. 
With persistent connections, the server leaves the TCP connection open after sending a 
response. Subsequent requests and responses between the same client and server can be sent 
over the same connection. In particular, an entire Web page can be sent over a single 
persistent TCP connection. Moreover, multiple Web pages residing on the same server can 
be sent from the server to the same client over a single persistent TCP connection. 
 
Only one connection establishment and connection termination is used, but the request for the 
image is sent separately 
 

Computer Networks (BCS502) 
Department of CSE, CEC                                                                                                                                           17 
 
 
Message Formats  
The HTTP protocol defines the format of the request and response messages.  
 
Request  Message 
Method: There are five HTTP methods: 
⮚ 
GET: The GET method is used when the browser requests an object, with the requested 
object identified in the URL field. 
⮚ POST: With a POST message, the user is still requesting a Web page from the server, but 
the specific contents of the Web page depend on what the user entered into the form fields. 
If the value of the method field is POST, then the entity body contains what the user 
entered into the form fields. 
⮚ PUT: The PUT method is also used by applications that need to upload objects to Web 
servers. 
⮚ HEAD: Used to retrieve header information. It is used for debugging purpose. 
⮚ DELETE: The DELETE method allows a user, or an application, to delete an object on a 
Web server. 
URL: Specifies URL of the requested object 
Version: This field represents HTTP version, usually HTTP/1.1 
Header line: Ex: 
Host: www.someschool.edu 
Connection: close 
User-agent: Mozilla/5.0 
Accept-language: fr 
The header line Host:www.someschool.edu specifies the host on which the 
object resides. 
By including the Connection:close header line, the browser is telling the 
server that it doesn’t want to bother with persistent connections; it wants 
the server to close the connection after sending the requested object. 
The User-agent: header line specifies the user agent, that is, the browser 
type that is making the request to the server. Here the user agent is 
Mozilla/5.0, a Firefox browser. 
The Accept-language: header indicates that the user prefers to receive a 
French version of the object, if such an object exists on the server; 
otherwise, the server should send its default version. 
 

Computer Networks (BCS502) 
Department of CSE, CEC                                                                                                                                           18 
 
 
Response Message 
 
The status line has three fields: the protocol version field, a status code, and a corresponding 
status message. 
Version is HTTP/1.1 
The status code and associated phrase indicate the result of the request. Some common 
status codes and associated phrases include: 
1. 200 OK: Request succeeded and the information is returned in the response. 
2. 301 Moved Permanently: Requested object has been permanently moved; the new 
URL is specified in Location: header of the response message. The client software will 
automatically retrieve the new URL. 
3. 400 Bad Request: This is a generic error code indicating that the request could not be 
understood by the server. 
4. 404 Not Found: The requested document does not exist on this server. 
5. 505 HTTP Version Not Supported: The requested HTTP protocol version is not 
supported by the server. 
Header fields: 
⮚ The server uses the Connection: close header line to tell the client that it is going to 
close the TCP connection after sending the message. 
⮚ The Date: header line indicates the time and date when the HTTP response was 
created and sent by the server. 
⮚ The Server: header line indicates that the message was generated by an Apache 
Web server; it is analogous to the User-agent: header line in the HTTP request 
message. 
EX 
HTTP/1.1 200 OK 
Connection: close 
Date: Tue, 09 Aug 2011 15:44:04 GMT 
Server: Apache/2.2.3 (CentOS) 
Last-Modified: Tue, 09 Aug 2011 15:11:03 GMT 
Content-Length: 6821 
Content-Type: text/html 
(data data data data data ...) 

Computer Networks (BCS502) 
Department of CSE, CEC                                                                                                                                           19 
 
 
⮚ The Last-Modified: header line indicates the time and date when the object was 
created or last modified. 
⮚ The Content-Length: header line indicates the number of bytes in the object being 
sent. 
⮚ The Content-Type: header line indicates that the object in the entity body is HTML 
text. 
 
Conditional Request 
A client can add a condition in its request. In this case, the server will send the requested web 
page if the condition is met or inform the client otherwise. One of the most common 
conditions imposed by the client is the time and date the web page is modified. The client can 
send the header line If-Modified-Since with the request to tell the server that it needs the page 
only if it is modified after a certain point in time. 
 
Example  
The following shows how a client imposes the modification data and time condition on a 
request.  
 
 
The status line in the response shows the file was not modified after the defined point in time. 
The body of the response message is also empty. 
 
 
 
Cookies 
An HTTP cookie (also called web cookie, Internet cookie, browser cookie, or simply cookie) 
is a small piece of data sent from a website and stored on the user's computer by the user's web 
browser while the user is browsing. Cookies were designed to be a reliable mechanism for 
websites to remember stateful information (such as items added in the shopping cart in an 
online store) or to record the user's browsing activity (including clicking particular buttons, 
logging in, or recording which pages were visited in the past). They can also be used to 
remember arbitrary pieces of information that the user previously entered into form fields such 
as names, addresses, passwords, and credit card numbers. 
It is often desirable for a Web site to identify users, either because the server wishes to restrict 

Computer Networks (BCS502) 
Department of CSE, CEC                                                                                                                                           20 
 
 
user access or because it wants to serve content as a function of the user identity. For these 
purposes, HTTP uses cookies. 
 
Creating and Storing Cookies 
The creation and storing of cookies depend on the implementation; however, the principle is 
the same.  
1. When a server receives a request from a client, it stores information about the client in a 
file or a string. The information may include the domain name of the client, the 
contents of the cookie (information the server has gathered about the client such as 
name, registration number, and so on), a timestamp, and other information depending 
on the implementation. 
2. The server includes the cookie in the response that it sends to the client. 
3. When the client receives the response, the browser stores the cookie in the cookie 
directory, which is sorted by the server domain name. 
 
Using Cookies  
When a client sends a request to a server, the browser looks in the cookie directory to see if it 
can find a cookie sent by that server. If found, the cookie is included in the request. When the 
server receives the request, it knows that this is an old client, not a new one. The contents of 
the cookie are never read by the browser or disclosed to the user. It is a cookie made by the 
server and eaten by the server. 
• An e-commerce store uses a cookie to track client shopping. When an item is added to 
the cart, a cookie with the item number and unit price is sent to the browser. Each new 
selection updates the cookie. At checkout, the last cookie is retrieved to calculate the 
total charge. 
• The site that restricts access to registered clients only sends a cookie to the client when 
the client registers for the first time. For any repeated access, only those clients that 
send the appropriate cookie are allowed.  
• A web portal uses the cookie in a similar way. When a user selects her favourite pages, 
a cookie is made and sent. If the site is accessed again, the cookie is sent to the server 
to show what the client is looking for. 
• Advertising agencies use cookies to track user behavior via banner ads on popular 
websites. When a user clicks a corporation's icon, a request goes to the agency, which 
sends the banner along with a cookie containing the user's ID. Future banner 
interactions build a profile of the user's web behavior. This data can be sold to third 
parties, making cookies controversial. New regulations are hoped to protect user 
privacy. 
Ex: 
Assume a shopper wants to buy a toy from an electronic store named BestToys.  
Shopper initiates request: Shopper visits the BestToys website and requests to view toys. 
Server creates cart: BestToys' server creates an empty shopping cart for this shopper, 
assigning a unique ID (e.g., 12343) to the cart. 
Server sends response: Server sends a response with toy images, each with clickable links. 

Computer Networks (BCS502) 
Department of CSE, CEC                                                                                                                                           21 
 
 
This response also includes a Set-Cookie header with the cart ID (12343), which is stored on 
the client’s device in a file named BestToys. 
Shopper selects toy: Shopper clicks a toy to add to the cart; the client sends a request with the 
cookie (ID 12343) in the header, identifying the shopper. 
Server retrieves cart: Server recognizes the returning ID 12343, retrieves the existing 
shopping cart, and adds the selected toy to the cart. 
Server provides total price: Server responds with the updated total price and prompts the 
shopper for payment details. 
Shopper makes payment: Shopper provides credit card information and submits it with the 
ID 12343 in the request. 
Order confirmation: Server confirms the ID, processes payment, completes the order, and 
sends a confirmation message to the shopper. 
 
 
Web Caching 
⮚ A Web cache—also called a proxy server—is a network entity that satisfies HTTP 
requests on the behalf of an origin Web server. 
⮚ The Web cache has its own disk storage and keeps copies of recently requested objects in 
this storage. 
⮚ A user’s browser can be configured so that all of the user’s HTTP requests are first 

Computer Networks (BCS502) 
Department of CSE, CEC                                                                                                                                           22 
 
 
directed to the Web cache. 
 
Ex 
Suppose a browser is requesting the object 
http://www.someschool.edu/campus.gif. 
Here is what happens: 
1. The browser establishes a TCP 
connection to the Web cache and 
sends an HTTP request for the object 
to the Web cache. 
2. The Web cache checks to see if it has a copy 
of the object stored locally. If it does, the 
Web cache returns the object within an 
HTTP response message to the client browser 
3. If the Web cache does not have the object, 
the Web cache opens a TCP connection to 
the 
origin 
server, 
that 
is, 
to 
www.someschool.edu. The Web cache then 
sends an HTTP request for the object into the 
cache-to-server TCP connection. 
4. After receiving this request, the origin server 
sends the object within an HTTP response to 
the Web cache. 
5. When the Web cache receives the object, it 
stores a copy in its local storage and sends a 
copy, within an HTTP response message, to 
the client browser (over the existing TCP 
connection between the client browser and 
the Web cache). 
 
HTTP Security  
HTTP per se does not provide security. HTTP can be run over the Secure Socket Layer (SSL). 
In this case, HTTP is referred to as HTTPS. HTTPS provides confidentiality, client and server 
authentication, and data integrity. 
 
FTP  
FTP (File Transfer Protocol) is used for transferring file from one host to another host. 
Transferring files between systems isn’t always simple, as systems can have different file name 
rules, data formats, or directory structures. FTP (File Transfer Protocol) addresses these issues 
smoothly, making it easier to move files between different systems. While HTTP can also 
transfer files, FTP is generally better for large files or when handling various file formats. 
 
 

Computer Networks (BCS502) 
Department of CSE, CEC                                                                                                                                           23 
 
 
Figure shows the basic model of FTP. The client has three components: the user interface, the 
client control process, and the client data transfer process.  
The server has two components: the server control process and the server data transfer 
process.  
The control connection is made between the control processes. The data connection is made 
between the data transfer processes.  
Separation of commands and data transfer makes FTP more efficient. The control connection 
uses very simple rules of communication. We need to transfer only a line of command or a 
line of response at a time. The data connection, on the other hand, needs more complex rules 
due to the variety of data types transferred. 
 
Two Connections  
The two connections in FTP have different lifetimes. The control connection remains 
connected during the entire interactive FTP session. The data connection is opened and then 
closed for each file transfer FTP uses two well-known TCP ports: port 21 is used for the 
control connection, and port 20 is used for the data connection. 
 
Control Connection  
Control communication is achieved through commands and responses. This simple method is 
adequate for the control connection because we send one command (or response) at a time. 
Each line is terminated with a two-character (carriage return and line feed) end-of-line token.  
During this control connection, commands are sent from the client to the server and responses 
are sent from the server to the client. Commands, which are sent from the FTP client control 
process, are in the form of ASCII uppercase, which may or may not be followed by an 
argument. Some of the most common commands are shown in Table. 
 

Computer Networks (BCS502) 
Department of CSE, CEC                                                                                                                                           24 
 
 
Every FTP command generates at least one response. A response has two parts: a three-digit 
number followed by text. The numeric part defines the code; the text part defines needed 
parameters or further explanations. The first digit defines the status of the command. The 
second digit defines the area in which the status applies. The third digit provides additional 
information. Table shows some common responses. 
 
 
 
Data Connection  
The data connection uses the well-known port 20 at the server site. However, the creation of a 
data connection is different from the control connection. The following  
shows the steps:  
1. The client, not the server, issues a passive open using an ephemeral port. This must be  
done by the client because it is the client that issues the commands for transferring files.  
2. Using the PORT command the client sends this port number to the server.  
3. The server receives the port number and issues an active open using the well-known port 20 
and the received ephemeral port number. 
 
Communication over Data Connection  
The purpose and implementation of the data connection are to transfer files through the data 
connection. The client must define the type of file to be transferred, the structure of the data, 
and the transmission mode.  
Before sending the file through the data connection, we prepare for transmission through the 
control connection. The heterogeneity problem is resolved by defining three attributes of 
communication: file type, data structure, and transmission mode.  
File Type  
FTP can transfer one of the following file types across the data connection: ASCII file, 
EBCDIC file, or image file.  
Data Structure  
FTP can transfer a file across the data connection using one of the following interpretations of 
the structure of the data: file structure, record structure, or page structure.  
Transmission Mode  
FTP can transfer a file across the data connection using one of the following three 
transmission modes: stream mode, block mode, or compressed mode. The stream mode is the 

Computer Networks (BCS502) 
Department of CSE, CEC                                                                                                                                           25 
 
 
default mode; data are delivered from FTP to TCP as a continuous stream of bytes. In the 
block mode, data can be delivered from FTP to TCP in blocks.  
File Transfer  
File transfer occurs over the data connection under the control of the commands sent over the 
control connection. However, we should remember that file transfer in FTP means one of three 
things: retrieving a file (server to client), storing a file (client to server), and directory listing 
(server to client). 
 
Security for FTP  
The FTP protocol was designed when security was not a big issue. Although FTP requires a 
password, the password is sent in plaintext (unencrypted), which means it can be intercepted 
and used by an attacker. The data transfer connection also transfers data in plain text, which is 
insecure. To be secure, one can add a Secure Socket Layer between the FTP application layer 
and the TCP layer. In this case FTP is called SSL-FTP. 
 
ELECTRONIC MAIL 
Electronic mail (or e-mail) allows users to exchange messages. In applications like HTTP or 
FTP, the server constantly awaits client requests to provide a response, whereas in email, 
messages are sent and stored until the recipient retrieves them. when Alice sends an email to 
Bob, a response is optional and, if given, is a separate transaction. Unlike typical client-server 
setups, Bob doesn't run a server to receive emails, as he might be offline. Instead, intermediate 
servers handle the client-server functions, allowing users to connect only when they wish to 
check or send messages. 
 
Architecture 
To explain the architecture of email, we present a typical scenario, as illustrated in Figure. An 
alternative scenario occurs when Alice or Bob is directly connected to their respective mail 
server, eliminating the need for a LAN or WAN connection; however, this variation does not 
affect the overall discussion. 
 
 

Computer Networks (BCS502) 
Department of CSE, CEC                                                                                                                                           26 
 
 
In the common scenario, the sender and the receiver of the e-mail, Alice and Bob respectively, 
are connected via a LAN or a WAN to two mail servers. The administrator has created one 
mailbox for each user where the received messages are stored. A mailbox is part of a server 
hard drive, a special file with permission restrictions. Only the owner of the mailbox has 
access to it. The administrator has also created a queue (spool) to store messages waiting to be 
sent.  
A simple e-mail from Alice to Bob takes nine different steps, as shown in the figure. Alice and 
Bob use three different agents: a user agent (UA), a message transfer agent (MTA), and a 
message access agent (MAA).  
1. Alice composes an email using her User Agent (UA). 
2. The UA sends the message to the Message Transfer Agent (MTA) client on Alice’s mail 
server. 
3. The MTA client forwards the message to the MTA server on the same mail server. 
4. The email is placed in a spool (queue) on Alice’s mail server, awaiting transfer. 
5. The MTA client sends the email across the Internet to Bob’s mail server. 
6. The MTA server on Bob’s mail server receives the email. 
7. The email is stored in Bob’s mailbox on his mail server. 
8. Bob’s Message Access Agent (MAA) server retrieves the message from the mailbox. 
9. Bob uses his MAA client to access the message through his User Agent (UA). 
 
There are two important points we need to emphasize here.  
1. Bob cannot directly use the MTA server to receive messages, as this would require him 
to run the MTA server continuously, keeping his computer and network connection on 
all the time—an impractical setup, especially with a WAN connection. 
2. Unlike the MTA client-server, which "pushes" messages to the server, Bob requires 
"pull" programs to retrieve messages. This is why he needs Message Access Agent 
(MAA) programs, allowing him to pull messages from the server when needed. 
 
User Agent  
The first component of an electronic mail system is the user agent (UA). A user agent is a 
software package (program) that composes, reads, replies to, and forwards messages. It also 
handles local mailboxes on the user computers.  
There are two types of user agents: command-driven and GUI-based.  
 A command-driven user agent normally accepts a one-character command from the keyboard 
to perform its task. For example, a user can type the character r, at the command prompt, to 
reply to the sender of the message, or type the character R to reply to the sender and all 
recipients. Some examples of command driven user agents are mail, pine, and elm.  
Modern user agents are GUI-based. They contain graphical user interface (GUI) components 
that allow the user to interact with the software by using both the keyboard and the mouse. 
Some examples of GUI-based user agents are Eudora and Outlook. 
 
 
 

Computer Networks (BCS502) 
Department of CSE, CEC                                                                                                                                           27 
 
 
Sending Mail 
To send mail, the user, through the UA, creates mail that looks very similar to postal mail. It 
has an envelope and a message. The envelope usually contains the sender address, the receiver 
address, and other information. The message contains the header and the body. The header of 
the message defines the sender, the receiver, the subject of the message, and some other 
information. The body of the message contains the actual information to be read by the 
recipient. 
 
Receiving Mail  
The user agent is triggered by the user (or a timer). If a user has mail, the UA informs the user 
with a notice. If the user is ready to read the mail, a list is displayed in which each line 
contains a summary of the information about a particular message in the mailbox. The 
summary usually includes the sender mail address, the subject, and the time the mail was sent 
or received. The user can select any of the messages and display its contents on the screen. 
 
Addresses  
To deliver mail, a mail handling system must use an addressing system with unique addresses. 
In the Internet, the address consists of two parts: a local part and a domain name, separated by 
an @ sign. 
 
The local part of an email address specifies the user's mailbox, while the domain part 
identifies the mail server or exchanger for sending and receiving mail. 
 
Mailing List or Group List  
Electronic mail allows one name, an alias, to represent several different e-mail addresses; this 
is called a mailing list. Every time a message is to be sent, the system checks the recipient’s 
name against the alias database; if there is a mailing list for the defined alias, separate 
messages, one for each entry in the list, must be prepared and handed to the MTA. 
 
Message Transfer Agent: SMTP 
An e-mail is an application that needs three uses of client-server paradigms to accomplish its 
task. It is important that we distinguish these three when we are dealing with e-mail. Figure 
shows these three client-server applications. We refer to the first and the second as Message 
Transfer Agents (MTAs), the third as Message Access Agent (MAA). 
The formal protocol that defines the MTA client and server in the Internet is called Simple 
Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP). 

Computer Networks (BCS502) 
Department of CSE, CEC                                                                                                                                           28 
 
 
 
 
Commands and Responses  
SMTP uses commands and responses to transfer messages between an MTA client and an 
MTA server. The command is from an MTA client to an MTA server; the response is from an 
MTA server to the MTA client. Each command or reply is terminated by a two character 
(carriage return and line feed) end-of-line token. 
 
Mail Transfer Phases  
The process of transferring a mail message occurs in three phases: connection estab 
lishment, mail transfer, and connection termination.  
Connection Establishment  
After a client has made a TCP connection to the well 
known port 25, the SMTP server starts the connection phase. This phase involves the  
following three steps:  
1. The server sends code 220 (service ready) to tell the client that it is ready to receive  
mail. If the server is not ready, it sends code 421 (service not available).  
2. The client sends the HELO message to identify itself, using its domain name  
address. This step is necessary to inform the server of the domain name of the client.  
3. The server responds with code 250 (request command completed) or some other  
code depending on the situation.  
 
Message Transfer  
After connection has been established between the SMTP client and server, a single message 
between a sender and one or more recipients can be exchanged. This phase involves eight 
steps. Steps 3 and 4 are repeated if there is more than one recipient.  
1. The client sends the MAIL FROM message to introduce the sender of the message.  
It includes the mail address of the sender (mailbox and the domain name). This  
step is needed to give the server the return mail address for returning errors and  
reporting messages.  
2. The server responds with code 250 or some other appropriate code.  
3. The client sends the RCPT TO (recipient) message, which includes the mail address  
of the recipient.  
4. The server responds with code 250 or some other appropriate code.  
5. The client sends the DATA message to initialize the message transfer.  
6. The server responds with code 354 (start mail input) or some other appropriate  
message.  

Computer Networks (BCS502) 
Department of CSE, CEC                                                                                                                                           29 
 
 
7. The client sends the contents of the message in consecutive lines. Each line is terminated by 
a two-character end-of-line token (carriage return and line feed). The message is terminated by 
a line containing just one period.  
8. The server responds with code 250 (OK) or some other appropriate code. 
 
Connection Termination  
After the message is transferred successfully, the client terminates the connection. This phase 
involves two steps.  
1. The client sends the QUIT command.  
2. The server responds with code 221 or some other appropriate code. 
 
Message Access Agent: POP and IMAP 
SMTP protocol delivers the mail to the mail server (Push Protocol). To fetch the mail from 
mail server receiver used mail access protocols (Pull Protocol).There are currently a number 
of popular mail access protocols, including Post Office Protocol— Version 3 (POP3), Internet 
Mail Access Protocol (IMAP), and HTTP. 
POP3  
Post Office Protocol, version 3 (POP3) is simple but limited in functionality. The client 
POP3 software is installed on the recipient computer; the server POP3 software is installed on 
the mail server. Mail access starts with the client when the user needs to download its e-mail 
from the mailbox on the mail server. The client opens a connection to the server on TCP port 
110. It then sends its user name and password to access the mailbox. The user can then list and 
retrieve the mail messages, one by one. 
 
POP3 has two modes: the delete mode and the keep mode. In the delete mode, the mail is 
deleted from the mailbox after each retrieval. In the keep mode, the mail remains in the 
mailbox after retrieval. 

Computer Networks (BCS502) 
Department of CSE, CEC                                                                                                                                           30 
 
 
IMAP4  
Another mail access protocol is Internet Mail Access Protocol, version 4 (IMAP4). IMAP4 
is similar to POP3, but it has more features; IMAP4 is more powerful and more complex.  
POP3 is deficient in several ways. It does not allow the user to organize her mail on the server; 
the user cannot have different folders on the server. In addition, POP3 does not allow the user 
to partially check the contents of the mail before downloading. IMAP4 provides the following 
extra functions:  
• A user can check the e-mail header prior to downloading.  
• A user can search the contents of the e-mail for a specific string of characters prior  
• to downloading.  
• A user can partially download e-mail. This is especially useful if bandwidth is limited 
and the e-mail contains multimedia with high bandwidth requirements.  
• A user can create, delete, or rename mailboxes on the mail server.  
• A user can create a hierarchy of mailboxes in a folder for e-mail storage. 
 
MIME 
Email has a simple structure, but it is limited to sending messages in 7-bit ASCII format, 
which restricts its use for non-English languages and prevents sending binary files, video, or 
audio data. 
Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions (MIME) is a supplementary protocol that allows 
non-ASCII data to be sent through e-mail. MIME transforms non-ASCII data at the sender site 
to NVT ASCII data and delivers it to the client MTA to be sent through the Internet. The 
message at the receiving site is transformed back to the original data.  
MIME is a set of software functions that transforms non-ASCII data to ASCII data and vice 
versa. 
 
 
MIME Headers  
MIME defines five headers, which can be added to the original e-mail header section to define 
the transformation parameters: 
 

Computer Networks (BCS502) 
Department of CSE, CEC                                                                                                                                           31 
 
 
MIME-Version -This header defines the version of MIME used. The current version is 1.1.  
Content-Type -This header defines the type of data used in the body of the message. The 
content type and the content subtype are separated by a slash. Depending on the subtype, the 
header may contain other parameters. MIME allows seven different types of data, listed in 
Table 
 
Content-Transfer-Encoding  
This header defines the method used to encode the messages into 0s and 1s for transport. The 
five types of encoding methods are listed in Table. 
 
 
Content-ID - This header uniquely identifies the whole message in a multiple message 
environment.  
 
Content-Description -This header defines whether the body is image, audio, or video. 
 
 
Web-Based Mail  
E-mail is such a common application that some websites today provide this service to anyone 
who accesses the site. Three common sites are Hotmail, Yahoo, and Google mail. The idea is 
very simple. Figure shows two cases: 
 
 

Computer Networks (BCS502) 
Department of CSE, CEC                                                                                                                                           32 
 
 
 
  
 
Case I 
In this scenario, Alice uses a traditional mail server to send an email to Bob, who has an 
account on a web-based server. The email is transferred from Alice's browser to her mail 
server via SMTP, and from the sending mail server to the receiving mail server through SMTP 
as well. However, when the message reaches Bob's web server, it is transferred to Bob’s 
browser via HTTP, not POP3 or IMAP4. Bob requests his emails through HTTP by logging 
into the website (e.g., Hotmail). Once logged in, the web server sends a list of emails in 
HTML format, and Bob can browse and retrieve his emails using more HTTP transactions. 
 
 
 
Case II 
In this case, both Alice and Bob use web servers, but not necessarily the same one. Alice sends 
her email to her web server using HTTP, with Bob's mailbox address as the URL. The Alice 
server then forwards the message to Bob's server using SMTP. Bob receives the email through 
HTTP transactions, but the transfer between servers still occurs via SMTP. 
 
E-Mail Security 
The email protocols do not include built-in security features. However, email exchanges can 
be secured using two application-layer security protocols, Pretty Good Privacy (PGP) and 
Secure/Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions (S/MIME).  
 
 

Computer Networks (BCS502) 
Department of CSE, CEC                                                                                                                                           33 
 
 
TELNET 
A specific client/server program is designed to provide a service, like FTP for file transfer. 
However, having a separate client/server pair for each service is not scalable. A solution is to 
use generic client/server programs that allow users to log into remote computers and use 
available services. For example, a student can log into a university server using a remote login 
program to access services like the Java compiler, without needing a separate client for each 
service. These generic programs are called remote login applications. 
 
TELNET is an early remote login protocol that requires a username and password but sends 
all data, including the password, in plaintext, making it vulnerable to hacking. Due to security 
risks, TELNET has largely been replaced by Secure Shell (SSH), which provides encrypted 
communication. 
TELNET is briefly discussed because of its historical significance and for comparison with 
SSH. 
1. The simple plaintext architecture of TELNET allows us to explain the issues and 
challenges related to the concept of remote logging, which is also used in SSH when it 
serves as a remote logging protocol.  
2. Network administrators often use TELNET for diagnostic and debugging purposes. 
 
Local versus Remote Logging 
 
 
Local logging: When a user logs into their local system, keystrokes are processed by the 
terminal driver and passed to the operating system, which interprets them and invokes the 
appropriate application. 
 
Remote logging: When accessing a program on a remote machine, TELNET is used. The 
user's keystrokes are sent to the terminal driver, but instead of being interpreted locally, they 
are passed to the TELNET client, which converts them into Network Virtual Terminal 

Computer Networks (BCS502) 
Department of CSE, CEC                                                                                                                                           34 
 
 
(NVT) characters. These NVT characters are sent through the network to the remote machine. 
 
On the remote machine, the NVT characters are received by the TCP/IP stack and passed to 
the TELNET server. The server translates the NVT characters to ones the remote system can 
understand. Since the remote operating system can't directly process TELNET characters, a 
pseudoterminal driver is used to simulate a terminal input, allowing the characters to be 
passed to the correct application. 
 
Network Virtual Terminal (NVT) 
Accessing remote computers can be complex due to the different operating systems using 
unique character combinations as tokens (e.g., Ctrl+z for DOS and Ctrl+d for UNIX). To 
handle this complexity, TELNET provides a universal interface called the Network Virtual 
Terminal (NVT) character set. 
• NVT Character Set: This allows TELNET to translate characters (data or commands) 
from the local terminal into NVT format for transmission across the network. On the 
remote side, TELNET translates the NVT characters back into a format understood by 
the remote computer. 
• Data and Control Characters: NVT uses two sets of 8-bit characters: 
o NVT ASCII: For data, it uses a character set where the lowest 7 bits match US 
ASCII, and the highest bit is 0. 
o Control Characters: For control data, the highest bit is set to 1. 
 
This system ensures that remote systems with different operating environments can 
communicate effectively. 
 
Options  
TELNET lets the client and server negotiate options before or during the use of the service. 
Options are extra features available to a user with a more sophisticated terminal. Users with 
simpler terminals can use default features. 
 
User Interface  
The operating system (UNIX, for example) defines an interface with user-friendly commands. 

Computer Networks (BCS502) 
Department of CSE, CEC                                                                                                                                           35 
 
 
SECURE SHELL (SSH)  
Although Secure Shell (SSH) is a secure application program that can be used today for 
several purposes such as remote logging and file transfer, it was originally designed to replace 
TELNET. There are two versions of SSH: SSH-1 and SSH-2, which are totally incompatible. 
The first version, SSH-1, is now deprecated because of security flaws in it. 
 
Components  
SSH is an application-layer protocol with three components. 
 
SSH Transport-Layer Protocol (SSH-TRANS) 
Since TCP is not a secure transport-layer protocol, SSH uses an additional protocol called 
SSH-TRANS to create a secure channel on top of TCP. The process begins with the client and 
server establishing an insecure connection via TCP. They then exchange security parameters 
to establish a secure channel using SSH-TRANS. 
The services provided by this protocol:  
1. Privacy or confidentiality of the message exchanged  
2. Data integrity, which means that it is guaranteed that the messages exchanged between the 
client and server are not changed by an intruder. 
3. Server authentication, which means that the client is now sure that the server is the  
one that it claims to be  
4. Compression of the messages, which improves the efficiency of the system and  
makes attack more difficult. 
 
SSH Authentication Protocol (SSH-AUTH) 
After establishing a secure channel and authenticating the server, SSH proceeds to 
authenticate the client. The client sends a request to the server with the username, server name, 
authentication method, and required data. The server then responds with either a success 
message, confirming authentication, or a failure message, prompting the client to try again 
with a new request. This process is similar to client authentication in SSL. 
 
SSH Connection Protocol (SSH-CONN) 
Once the secure channel is established and both the server and client are authenticated, SSH 
uses the SSH-CONN protocol. One of its key features is multiplexing, which allows the 
client to create multiple logical channels over the secure channel. Each channel can be used 
for different purposes, such as remote logging or file transfer. 

Computer Networks (BCS502) 
Department of CSE, CEC                                                                                                                                           36 
 
 
Applications  
Although SSH is often thought of as a replacement for TELNET, SSH is, in fact, a general-
purpose protocol that provides a secure connection between a client and server. 
 
1. SSH for Remote Logging -Several free and commercial applications use SSH for 
remote logging.  
2. SSH for File Transfer -One of the application programs that is built on top of SSH for 
file transfer is the Secure File Transfer Program (sftp). 
3. Port Forwarding -One of the interesting services provided by the SSH protocol is port 
forwarding. We can use the secured channels available in SSH to access an application 
program that does not provide security services. Applications such as TELNET and 
Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP), can use the services of the SSH port 
forwarding mechanism. The SSH port forwarding mechanism creates a tunnel through 
which the messages belonging to other protocols can travel. For this reason, this 
mechanism is sometimes referred to as SSH tunnelling. 
 
Format of the SSH Packets 
 
The length field defines the length of the packet but does not include the padding. One to eight 
bytes of padding is added to the packet to make the attack on the security provision more 
difficult. The cyclic redundancy check (CRC) field is used for error detection. The type field 
designates the type of the packet used in different SSH protocols. The data field is the data 
transferred by the packet in different protocols. 
 

Computer Networks (BCS502) 
Department of CSE, CEC                                                                                                                                           37 
 
 
DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM (DNS) 
The Domain Name System (DNS) was developed to simplify access to Internet resources by 
mapping human-friendly names to IP addresses, which are needed for network identification. 
Similar to how a telephone directory helps map names to numbers, DNS serves as a directory 
for the Internet, allowing users to remember domain names rather than numeric IP addresses. 
A central directory for the entire Internet would be impractical due to its vast scale and 
vulnerability to failures. Instead, DNS information is distributed across multiple servers 
worldwide. When a host requires name-to-IP mapping, it contacts the nearest DNS server with 
the necessary information. This distributed structure enhances reliability and efficiency. 
Figure shows how TCP/IP uses a DNS client and a DNS server to map a name to an address. 
A user wants to use a file transfer client to access the corresponding file transfer server 
running on a remote host. The user knows only the file transfer server name, such as 
afilesource.com. The TCP/IP suite needs the IP address of the file transfer server to make the 
connection. 
 
The following six steps map the host name to an IP address:  
1. The user passes the host name to the file transfer client.  
2. The file transfer client passes the host name to the DNS client.  
3. Each computer, after being booted, knows the address of one DNS server. The DNS 
client sends a message to a DNS server with a query that gives the file transfer server 
name using the known IP address of the DNS server.  
4. The DNS server responds with the IP address of the desired file transfer server.  
5. The DNS server passes the IP address to the file transfer client.  
6. The file transfer client now uses the received IP address to access the file transfer server. 

Computer Networks (BCS502) 
Department of CSE, CEC                                                                                                                                           38 
 
 
Name Space 
To be unambiguous, the names assigned to machines must be carefully selected from a name 
space with complete control over the binding between the names and IP addresses. A name 
space that maps each address to a unique name can be organized in two ways: flat or 
hierarchical 
Flat Name Space: 
o Each name is a sequence of characters without inherent structure or meaning. 
o Names might share common segments, but this doesn’t imply any relationship. 
o Centralized control is needed to avoid duplication, making a flat name space 
impractical for large systems like the Internet. 
Hierarchical Name Space: 
o Names consist of multiple parts, with each part representing a specific element, 
such as organization type, organization name, or department. 
o Decentralization is possible since a central authority assigns only a portion of 
the name (e.g., organization type and name). 
o Organizations manage the remaining parts, allowing unique identifiers even if 
different organizations use the same host name. For instance, "caesar.first.com" 
and "caesar.second.com" are distinct due to the organization names, ensuring 
uniqueness in large networks like the Internet. 
This hierarchical structure is key to the Domain Name System (DNS), enabling efficient, 
scalable, and decentralized name resolution across the Internet. 
Domain Name Space  
To have a hierarchical name space, a domain name space was designed. In this design the 
names are defined in an inverted-tree structure with the root at the top. The tree can have 
only 128 levels: level 0 (root) to level 127 . 
 
 

Computer Networks (BCS502) 
Department of CSE, CEC                                                                                                                                           39 
 
 
Label  
Each node in the tree has a label, which is a string with a maximum of 63 characters. The 
root label is a null string (empty string). DNS requires that children of a node (nodes that 
branch from the same node) have different labels, which guarantees the uniqueness of the 
domain names.  
Domain Name  
Each node in the tree has a domain name. A full domain name is a sequence of labels 
separated by dots (.). The domain names are always read from the node up to the root. The 
last label is the label of the root (null). 
 
If a label is terminated by a null string, it is called a fully qualified domain name 
(FQDN). The name must end with a null label, but because null means nothing, the label 
ends with a dot. If a label is not terminated by a null string, it is called a partially qualified 
domain name (PQDN). A PQDN starts from a node, but it does not reach the root. It is 
used when the name to be resolved belongs to the same site as the client. Here the resolver 
can supply the missing part, called the suffix, to create an FQDN. 
Domain  
A domain is a subtree of the domain name space. The name of the domain is the name of 
the node at the top of the subtree. Note that a domain may itself be divided into domains. 
 

Computer Networks (BCS502) 
Department of CSE, CEC                                                                                                                                           40 
 
 
Distribution of Name Space  
The information contained in the domain name space must be stored. However, it is very 
inefficient and also not reliable to have just one computer store such a huge amount of 
information. It is inefficient because responding to requests from all over the world places 
a heavy load on the system. It is not reliable because any failure makes the data 
inaccessible. 
Hierarchy of Name Servers 
The solution to these problems is to distribute the information among many computers 
called DNS servers. One way to do this is to divide the whole space into many domains 
based on the first level. In other words, we let the root stand alone and create as many 
domains (subtrees) as there are first-level nodes. Because a domain created this way could 
be very large, DNS allows domains to be divided further into smaller domains 
(subdomains). Each server can be responsible (authoritative) for either a large or small 
domain.  
 
Zone 
In DNS, a zone represents the part of the DNS hierarchy for which a server holds authority, 
facilitating distributed management. If a server is responsible for an entire domain without 
subdivisions, then the zone and domain are effectively the same, and the server keeps all 
relevant data in a zone file. However, if the server divides its domain into smaller 
subdomains and delegates authority for these to other servers, the zone differs from the 
domain. In this case, the main server retains responsibility for the broader domain but 
references lower-level servers that manage data for the specific subdomains. This 
hierarchical structure enables scalable and efficient distribution of DNS data across multiple 
servers. 

Computer Networks (BCS502) 
Department of CSE, CEC                                                                                                                                           41 
 
 
 
Root Server  
A root server is a server whose zone consists of the whole tree. A root server usually does 
not store any information about domains but delegates its authority to other servers, 
keeping references to those servers. There are several root servers, each covering the 
whole domain name space. The root servers are distributed all around the world. 
Primary and Secondary Servers  
DNS defines two types of servers: primary and secondary. A primary server is a server 
that stores a file about the zone for which it is an authority. It is responsible for creating, 
maintaining, and updating the zone file. It stores the zone file on a local disk.  
A secondary server is a server that transfers the complete information about a zone from 
another server (primary or secondary) and stores the file on its local disk. The secondary 
server neither creates nor updates the zone files. If updating is required, it must be done by 
the primary server, which sends the updated version to the secondary. 
DNS in the Internet  
DNS is a protocol that can be used in different platforms. In the Internet, the domain name 
space (tree) was originally divided into three different sections: generic domains, country 
domains, and the inverse domains. However, due to the rapid growth of the Internet, it 
became extremely difficult to keep track of the inverse domains, which could be used to 
find the name of a host when given the IP address. The inverse domains are now 
deprecated. 
 
 

Computer Networks (BCS502) 
Department of CSE, CEC                                                                                                                                           42 
 
 
Generic Domains  
The generic domains define registered hosts according to their generic behaviour. Each 
node in the tree defines a domain, which is an index to the domain name space database. 
 
Looking at the tree, we see that the first level in the generic domains section allows 14 
possible labels. These labels describe the organization types as listed in Table 
 
Country Domains  
The country domains section uses two-character country abbreviations (e.g., us for 
United States). Second labels can be organizational, or they can be more specific national 
designations. The United States, for example, uses state abbreviations as a sub division of 
us (e.g., ca.us.). The address uci.ca.us. can be translated to University of California, Irvine, 
in the state of California in the United States. 
 

Computer Networks (BCS502) 
Department of CSE, CEC                                                                                                                                           43 
 
 
Resolution  
Mapping a name to an address is called name-address resolution. DNS is designed as a 
client-server application. A host that needs to map an address to a name or a name to an 
address calls a DNS client called a resolver. The resolver accesses the closest DNS server 
with a mapping request. If the server has the information, it satisfies the resolver; 
otherwise, it either refers the resolver to other servers or asks other servers to provide the 
information. After the resolver receives the mapping, it interprets the response to see if it is 
a real resolution or an error, and finally delivers the result to the process that requested it. 
A resolution can be either recursive or iterative. 
Recursive Resolution  
In a recursive DNS resolution, an application on a host (e.g., some.anet.com) needs the IP 
address of another host (e.g., engineering.mcgraw-hill.com) to send a message. The source 
host’s DNS resolver (client) queries its local DNS server (dns.anet.com), which doesn’t 
have the address and forwards the request to a root DNS server. The root server, lacking 
the specific mapping, knows the relevant top-level domain server (e.g., for .com) and 
forwards the query there. This server, not having the exact address, directs the query to 
McGraw-Hill’s local DNS server (dns.mcgraw-hill.com), which finally provides the 
destination IP. This IP address is sent back step-by-step—from McGraw-Hill’s DNS 
server to the top-level DNS server, then to the root server, the ISP’s DNS server (which 
caches it), and ultimately back to the source host. 
 
Iterative Resolution  
In iterative resolution, each server that does not know the mapping sends the IP address 
of the next server back to the one that requested it. Figure shows the flow of information in 
an iterative resolution. Normally the iterative resolution takes place between two local 
servers; the original resolver gets the final answer from the local server. Note that the 

Computer Networks (BCS502) 
Department of CSE, CEC                                                                                                                                           44 
 
 
messages shown by events 2, 4, and 6 contain the same query. However, the message 
shown by event 3 contains the IP address of the top-level domain server, the message 
shown by event 5 contains the IP address of the McGraw-Hill local DNS server, and the 
message shown by event 7 contains the IP address of the destination. When the Anet local 
DNS server receives the IP address of the destination, it sends it to the resolver (event 8). 
 
Caching 
To improve efficiency, DNS servers use caching. When a server requests a name-to-IP 
mapping from another server and receives a response, it stores the information in its cache 
memory. If the same or another client requests that mapping again, the server can quickly 
retrieve it from the cache, marked as unauthoritative to indicate it’s not from the original 
source. 
While caching speeds up DNS resolution, it can lead to issues if a mapping becomes 
outdated. To manage this, each authoritative server includes a time-to-live (TTL) value 
with the mapping, specifying how long the receiving server can cache it before it becomes 
invalid. DNS servers also keep a TTL counter for each cached mapping, regularly 
checking and purging entries with expired TTLs to maintain up-to-date data. 
Resource Records  
The zone information associated with a server is implemented as a set of resource records.  
A resource record is a 5-tuple structure, as shown below: 
 
 The domain name field is what identifies the resource record. The value defines the 
information kept about the domain name. The TTL defines the number of seconds for 

Computer Networks (BCS502) 
Department of CSE, CEC                                                                                                                                           45 
 
 
which the information is valid. The class defines the type of network; we are only 
interested in the class IN (Internet). The type defines how the value should be interpreted. 
Table lists the common types and how the value is interpreted for each type. 
 
DNS Messages  
To retrieve information about hosts, DNS uses two types of messages: query and response. 
Both types have the same format. 
 
• The identification field is used by the client to match the response with the query. 
• The flag field defines whether the message is a query or response. It also includes 
status of error.  
• The next four fields in the header define the number of each record type in the 
message.  
• The question section consists of one or more question records. It is present in both 
query and response messages.  
• The answer section consists of one or more resource records. It is present only in 
response messages.  

Computer Networks (BCS502) 
Department of CSE, CEC                                                                                                                                           46 
 
 
• The authoritative section gives information (domain name) about one or more 
authoritative servers for the query.  
• The additional information section provides additional information that may help 
the resolver. 
Registrars 
New domains are added to the DNS through registrars, commercial entities accredited by 
ICANN. Registrars verify that the requested domain name is unique, enter it into the DNS 
database, and charge a fee. Today, there are many registrars; their names and addresses can be 
found at 
 
To register, the organization needs to give the name of its server and the IP address of the 
server. For example, a new commercial organization named wonderful with a server named 
ws and IP address 200.200.200.5 needs to give the following information to one of the 
registrars: 
 
DDNS 
The Dynamic Domain Name System (DDNS) was created to automate DNS updates, 
accommodating frequent address changes on today’s Internet. Instead of manual updates, 
DDNS allows changes like adding or removing hosts or updating IP addresses to be made 
dynamically. Typically, when a new name-to-address binding is established (e.g., via DHCP), 
it’s sent to the primary DNS server, which updates the zone. Secondary servers learn of these 
changes through active or passive notifications—either the primary server sends an alert, or 
secondary servers periodically check for updates. After notification, secondary servers 
perform a zone transfer to receive updated information. To prevent unauthorized changes, 
DDNS can implement an authentication mechanism. 
Security of DNS  
DNS is one of the most important systems in the Internet infrastructure; it provides crucial 
services to Internet users. Applications such as Web access or e-mail are heavily dependent on 
the proper operation of DNS. DNS can be attacked in several ways including:  
1. The attacker may read the response of a DNS server to find the nature or names of sites 
the user mostly accesses. This type of information can be used to find the user’s 
profile. To prevent this attack, DNS messages need to be confidential   

Computer Networks (BCS502) 
Department of CSE, CEC                                                                                                                                           47 
 
 
2. The attacker may intercept the response of a DNS server and change it or create a totally 
new bogus response to direct the user to the site or domain the attacker wishes the user 
to access. This type of attack can be prevented using message origin authentication and 
message integrity  
3.  The attacker may flood the DNS server to overwhelm it or eventually crash it. This type 
of attack can be prevented using the provision against denial-of-service attack. 
 To protect DNS, IETF has devised a technology named DNS Security (DNSSEC) that 
provides message origin authentication and message integrity using a security service called 
digital signature DNSSEC, however, does not provide confidentiality for the DNS messages. 
There is no specific protection against the denial-of service attack in the specification of 
DNSSEC. However, the caching system protects the upper-level servers against this attack to 
some extent. 
