Module 1 
Chapter 1: Introduction to Databases 
1.1 Introduction 
Databases and database technology have a major impact on the growing use ofcomputers. It is fair 
to say that databases play a critical role in almost all areas wherecomputers are used, including 
business, electronic commerce, engineering, medicine, genetics, law, education, and library 
science. 
 
Database 
A database is a collection of related data.1 Bydata,we mean known facts that can berecorded and 
that have implicit meaning. For example, consider the names, telephone numbers, and addresses of 
the people you know. 
 
A database has the following implicit properties: 
 It represents some aspect of the real world, sometimes called the miniworldor the universe 
of discourse (UoD). Changes to the miniworld are reflected in the database.
 It is a logically coherent collection of data, to which some meaning can be attached.  
  It is designed, built, and populated with data for a specific purpose.It has an intended group 
of users and some preconceived applications in which these users are interested. 
 
To summarize: a database has some source (i.e., the miniworld) from which data are derived, some 
degree of interaction with events in the represented miniworld and an audience that is interested in 
using it. 
 
Size/Complexity:A database can be of any size and complexity. For example, the list of names 
andaddresses referred to earlier may consist of only a few hundred records, each with asimple 
structure. An example of a large commercial database is Amazon.com. It contains data forover 20 
million books, CDs, videos, DVDs, games, electronics, apparel, and other 
items.  
Computerized vs. manual: A database may be generated and maintained manually or it may be 
computerized.For example, simple database like telephone directory may be created and 
maintained manually. Huge and complex database may be created and maintained either by a 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

group of application programs written specifically for that task or by a database management 
system. 
 
Database Management System (DBMS) 
 
A database management system (DBMS) is a collection of programs enabling users to create and 
maintain a database. More specifically, The DBMS is a general-purpose software systemthat 
facilitates the processes of defining, constructing, manipulating, and sharing 
databases among various users and applications. 
 Defining a database involves specifying the data types, structures, and constraints of the 
data to be stored in the database. The database definition or descriptive information is 
stored by the DBMS in the form of a database catalog or dictionary; it is called meta-data. 
 Constructing the database is the process of storing the data on some storage medium that 
is controlled by the DBMS. 
 Manipulating a database includes functions such as querying the database to retrieve 
specific data, updating the database to reflect changes in the miniworld, and generating 
reports from the data.  
 Sharing a database allows multiple users and programs to access the database 
simultaneously. 
 
Other important functions provided by the DBMS include protecting the database and maintaining 
it over a long period of time.  
 Protection includes system protectionagainst hardware or software malfunction (or 
crashes) and security protectionagainst unauthorized or malicious access.  
 A typical large database may have a life cycle of many years, so the DBMS must be able to 
maintain the database system by allowing the system to evolve as requirements change 
over time. 
A database together with the DBMS software is referred to as a database system. 
 
 
 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig 1.1(a): A simplified database system environment 
 
An Example 
Consider a UNIVERSITY database for maintaining information concerning students, courses, and 
grades in a university environment. The database is organized as five files, each of which stores 
data records of the same type. 
1. STUDENT file: stores data on each student. 
2. COURSE file: stores data on each course. 
3. SECTION file: stores data on each section of a course. 
4. GRADE_REPORT file: stores the grades that students receive in the various sections they 
have completed. 
5. PREREQUISITE file :stores the prerequisites of each course. 
 
 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig 1.1(b): A database that stores student and course information 
 
 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

Defining a UNIVERSITY database 
 Specify the structure of the records of each file - data elements to be stored in each  
record.For example: each STUDENT record includes data to represent the  
 
Name, Student_number, Class Major. Similarly each COURSE record includes data to  
represent the Course_name, Course_number, Credit_hours, and Department. 
 Specify a data type for each data element within a record. For example: 
 
isa string of alphabetic charactersStudent_number is an integer. 
 
Constructing the UNIVERSITY database 
 To construct the UNIVERSITY database, we store data to represent each student,course, 
section, grade report, and prerequisite as a record in the appropriate file. 
 Records in the various files may be related. For example, the record forSmith in the 
grades in two sections. Similarly, each record in the PREREQUISITEfile relates two 
course records: one representing the course and the other representing 
the prerequisite. 
 
Manipulating a UNIVERSITY database 
Database manipulation involves querying and updating.  
Examples of queries are asfollows: 
 Retrieve the transcript
a list of all courses and grades
 
 
2008 and their grades in that section 
 List the prerequisites of 
 
Examples of updates include the following: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
These informal queries and updates must be specified precisely in the query language 
of the DBMS before they can be processed. 
 
 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

As with software in general, design of a new application for an existing database or design of 
abrand new database starts off with a phase called requirements specification and 
analysis. These requirements are documented in detail and transformed into aconceptual design 
that can be represented and manipulated using some computerizedtools so that it can be easily 
maintained, modified, and transformed into a databaseimplementation.  
 
The design is then translated to alogical design that can be expressed in a data model implemented 
in a commercialDBMS. The final stage isphysical design, during which further specifications are 
provided for storing andaccessing the database. The database design is implemented, populated 
with actualdata, and continuously maintained to reflect the state of the miniworld. 
 
1.2 Characteristics of the Database Approach 
 
Database approach vs. File Processing approach 
 
Consider an organization that is organized as a collection of departments/offices. Each department 
has certain data processing "needs", many of which are unique to it.  
 
In the file processing approach, each department would control a collection of relevant data files 
and software applications to manipulate that data. For example, one user, the grade reporting 
enter new grades are implemented as part of the application. A second user, theaccounting office, 
about students, each user maintains separate files
and programs to manipulate these files
because each requires s
This redundancy in 
defining and storing data resultsin wasted storage space and in redundant efforts to maintain 
common up-to-datedata. 
 
In the database approach, a single repository maintains data that is defined onceand then accessed 
by various users. In file systems, each application is free to namedata elements independently. In 
contrast, in a database, the names or labels of dataare defined once, and used repeatedly by queries, 
transactions, and applications. 
 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

The main characteristics of the database approach versus the file-processingapproach are the 
following: 
 Self-describing nature of a database system 
 Insulation between programs and data, and data abstraction 
 Support of multiple views of the data 
 Sharing of data and multiuser transaction processing 
 
1. Self-Describing Nature of a Database System 
A fundamental characteristic of the database approach is that the database system contains not 
only the database itself but also a complete definition or description of the database structure 
and constraints.This meta-data (i.e., data about data) is stored in the so-called system catalog, 
which contains a description of the structure of each file, the type and storage format of each 
field, and the various constraints on the data (i.e., conditions that the data must satisfy).  
 
The system catalog is used not only by users but also by the DBMS software, which certainly 
needs to "know" how the data is structured/organized in order to interpret it in a manner 
consistent with that structure.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 
1.2(a): An example of a 
database catalog for the database 
 
 
2.  Insulation between Programs and Data, and Data Abstraction 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

Program-Data Independence: In traditional file processing, the structure of the data files 
accessed by an application is "hard-coded" in its source code. If, for some reason, we decide 
to change the structure of the data ,everyapplication in which a description of that file's 
structure is hard-coded must be changed!  
 
In contrast, DBMS access programs, in most cases, do not require such changes, because the 
structure of the data is described separately from the programs that access it and those 
programs consult the catalog in order to ascertain the structure of the data  so that they 
interpret that data properly.  
 
In other words, the DBMS provides a conceptual or logical view of the data to application 
programs, so that the underlying implementation may be changed without the programs being 
modified. (This is referred to as program-data independence.) 
 
Program-operation independence: In object-oriented and object-relationalsystems , users 
can define operations on data as part of the databasedefinitions.An operation (also called a 
function or method) is specified in two parts.The interface (or signature) of an operation 
includes the operation name and thedata types of its arguments (or parameters). The 
implementation (or method) of theoperation is specified separately and can be changed 
without affecting the interface.User application programs can operate on the data by invoking 
these operationsthrough their names and arguments, regardless of how the operations are 
implemented.This may be termed program-operation independence. 
 
Data abstraction 
The 
characteristic 
that 
allows 
program-data 
independence 
and 
program-
operationindependence is called data abstraction. A DBMS provides users with a conceptual 
representationof data that does not include many of the details of how the data isstored or how 
the operations are implemented. Informally, a data model is a type ofdata abstraction that is 
used to provide this conceptual representation. The datamodel uses logical concepts, such as 
objects, their properties, and their interrelationships,that may be easier for most users to 
understand than computer storageconcepts. Hence, the data model hides storage and 
implementation details that arenot of interest to most database users. 
 
3. Support of Multiple Views of the Data 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

A database typically has many users, each of whom may require a different perspectiveor 
viewof the database. A view may be a subset of the database or it may containvirtual data that 
is derived from the database files but is not explicitly stored. A multiuser DBMS whose users 
have a variety of distinct applications mustprovide facilities for defining multiple views. For 
example, one user of the databaseof Figure 1.2 may be interested only in accessing and printing 
the transcript of eachstudent; the view for this user is shown in Figure 1.2(b) 
Fig1.2(
b):  
view 
derived 
from 
the 
univers
ity 
databas
e 
 
4. Sharing of Data and Multiuser Transaction Processing 
A multiuser DBMS, as its name implies,must allow multiple users to access the database 
at the same time. This is essential if data for multiple applications is to be integratedand 
maintained in a single database. The DBMS must include concurrencycontrol software to ensure 
that several users trying to update the same data do so ina controlled manner so that the result of 
the updates is correct. For example, whenseveral reservation agents try to assign a seat on an 
airline flight, the DBMS shouldensure that each seat can be accessed by only one agent at a time 
for assignment to apassenger. These types of applications are generally called online transaction 
processing(OLTP) applications. A fundamental role of multiuser DBMS software is toensure that 
concurrent transactions operate correctly and efficiently. 
 
The concept of a transaction has become central to many database applications. Atransaction is an 
executing program or process that includes one or more databaseaccesses, such as reading or 
updating of database records. The DBMS must enforce several transaction properties. The 
isolation property ensures that each transaction appears to executein isolation from other 
transactions, even though hundreds of transactions may beexecuting concurrently. The atomicity 
property ensures that either all the databaseoperations in a transaction are executed or none are. 
 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

Database Users 
Users may be divided into 
 Those who actually use and control the database content, and those who design, develop and 
maintain database applications  called 
 
 Those who design and develop the DBMS software and related tools, and the computer 
systems operators called 
 
 
Actors on the Scene 
 
1. Database Administrator (DBA): chief administrator, who oversees and manages the 
database system (including the data and software). Duties include authorizing users to access 
the database, coordinating/monitoring its use, acquiring hardware/software for upgrades, 
etc.The DBA is accountable for problems such as securitybreaches and poor system response 
time.In large organizations, the DBA might have a support staff.  
2. Database Designers: responsible for identifying the data to be stored and for choosing an 
appropriate way to organize it. Database designers typically interact with each potential 
groupof 
users 
and 
develop 
views 
of 
the 
database that 
meet the 
data 
and 
processingrequirements of these groups.The final database design must be capable of 
supportingthe requirements of all user groups. 
3. End Users: These are persons who access the database for querying, updating, and  
report generation. Thereare several categories of end users: 
 Casual end users: use database occasionally, needing different information each 
time; use query language to specify their requests; typically middle- or high-level 
managers.  
 Naive/Parametric end users: biggest group of users; frequently query/update the 
database using standard canned transactions that have been carefully programmed 
and tested in advance. Examples:   
 bank tellers check account balances, post withdrawals/deposits  
 reservation clerks for airlines, hotels, etc., check availability of  
seats/rooms and make reservations.  
 
Sophisticated end users: 
who thoroughly familiarize themselves with the facilities of  the DBMS in order to 
implement their own applications to meet their complex requirements. 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

 Stand-alone users: 
maintain 
personal 
databases 
by 
using 
ready-made 
programpackages that provide easy-to-use menu-based or graphics-based 
interfaces. 
 Ex: user of a tax package that stores a variety of personalfinancial data  
for tax purposes. 
4. System Analysts and Application Programmers (Software Engineers) 
 System Analysts: determine needs of end users, especially naive and parametric 
users, and develop specifications for canned transactions that meet these needs.  
 Application Programmers: Implement, test, document, and maintain programs 
that satisfy the specifications mentioned above.  
 
Workers behind the Scene 
 
1. DBMS system designers and implementers: design and implement the DBMS modules and 
interfaces as a software package. A DBMS is a very complex software system that consists of 
many components, or modules, including modules for implementing the catalog, query 
language processing, interface processing, accessing and buffering data, controlling 
concurrency, and handling data recovery and security.  
2. Tool developers: design and implement tools that facilitate database modeling and design, 
database system design, and improved performance.  
3.  Operators and maintenance personnel (system administration personnel) : responsible for 
the actual running and maintenance of the hardware and software environment for the database 
system. 
 
 
 
1.3 Advantages of Using the DBMS Approach 
1. Controlling Redundancy 
Data redundancy such as tends to occur in the "file processing" approach leads to wasted 
storage space, duplication of effort and a higher likelihood of the introduction of 
inconsistency. 
 In the database approach, the views of different user groups are integrated during database 
design. This is known as data normalization, and it ensures consistency and saves storage 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

Space. However, it is sometimes necessary to use controlled redundancy to improve the 
performance of queries. For example, we may store Student_name and Course_number 
redundantly in a GRADE_REPORT file because whenever we retrieve a GRADE_REPORT 
record, we want to retrieve the student name and course number along with the grade, student 
number, and section identifier.  
A DBMS should provide the capability to automatically enforce the rule that no inconsistencies 
are introduced when data is updated. 
2. Restricting Unauthorized Access 
When multiple users share a large database, it is likely that most users will not be authorized to 
access all information in the database. For example, financial data is often considered 
confidential and only authorized persons are allowed to access such data. In addition, some 
users may only be permitted to retrieve data, whereas others are allowed to retrieve and update. 
Hence, the type of access operation
retrieval or update
must also be controlled. A DBMS 
should provide a security and authorization subsystem, which the DBA uses to create 
accounts, to specify account restrictions and enforce these restrictions automatically. 
3. Providing Persistent Storage for Program Objects 
 The values of program variables or objects are discarded once a program terminates, unless 
the programmer explicitly stores them in permanent files, which often involves converting 
these complex structures into a format suitable for file storage. Object-oriented database 
systems make it easier for complex runtime objects to be saved in secondary storage so as to 
survive beyond program termination and to be retrievable at a later time. 
     Object-oriented database systems are compatible with programming languages such as     C++ 
and Java, and the DBMS software automatically performs any necessary conversions.  
 
4. Providing Storage Structures and Search Techniques for Efficient Query Processing 
 DBMS maintains indexes that are utilized to improve the execution time of queries and  
updates. DBMS has a buffering or caching  module that maintains parts of the database in main 
memory buffers.The query processing and optimization module is responsible for choosing an 
efficient query execution plan for each query submitted to the system. 
 
5. Providing Backup and Recovery 
The backup and recovery subsystem of the DBMS is responsible for recovery. For example, if 
the computer system fails in the middle of a complex update transaction, the recovery 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

subsystem is responsible for making sure that the database is restored to the state it was in 
before the transaction started executing. Disk backup is also necessary in case of a catastrophic 
disk failure.  
 
6. Providing Multiple User Interfaces 
      Because many types of users with varying levels of technical knowledge use a database, a  
DBMS should provide a variety of user interfaces. These include  
 Query languages for casual users 
 Programming language interfaces for application programmers 
 Forms and command codes for parametric users 
 Menu-driven interfaces and natural language interfaces for standalone users.  
 
7. Representing Complex Relationships among Data 
A database may include numerous varieties of data that are interrelated in many ways. 
For example each section record is related to one course record and to a number of 
GRADE_REPORT records
one for each student who completed that section. A DBMS must 
have the capability to represent a variety of complex relationships among the data, to define 
new relationships as they arise, and to retrieve and update related data easily and efficiently. 
8. Enforcing Integrity Constraints 
      Most database applications are such that the semantics of the data require that it satisfy  certain 
restrictions in order to make sense.  
     The simplest type of integrity constraint involves specifying a data type for each data item. 
     For example, in student table we specified that the value of Name must be a string of no more 
than 30 alphabetic characters. 
More complex type of constraint is referential integrity involves specifying that a record  in 
one file must be related to records in other files. For example, in university database, we can 
specify that every section record must be related to a course record. 
 Another type of constraint specifies uniqueness on data item values, such as every course    
record must have a unique value for Course_number. This is known as a key or uniqueness 
constraint. 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

It is the responsibility of the database designers to identify integrity constraints during database 
design. 
9. Permitting Inferencing and Actions Using Rules 
In a deductive database system, one may specify declarative rules that allow the database to 
infer new data. For example, figure out which students are on academic probation. Such 
capabilities would take the place of application programs that would be used to ascertain such 
information otherwise.  
Active database systems go one step further by allowing "active rules" that can be used to 
initiate actions automatically.
triggers with tables. 
 
10. Additional Implications of Using the Database Approach 
 Potential for Enforcing Standards : database approach permits the DBA to define  and 
enforce standards among database users in a large organization which facilitates        
communication and cooperation among various departments, projects, and users within the 
organization.Standards can be defined for names and formats of data  elements, display 
formats, report structures and so on. 
 Reduced Application Development Time: once a database is up and running, 
substantially less time is generally required to create new applications using DBMS     
facilities. Development time using a DBMS is estimated to be one-sixth to one-fourth of 
that for a traditional file system. 
 Flexibility: It may be necessary to change the structure of a database as    requirements 
change.  DBMSs allow changes to the structure of the database without affecting the stored 
data and the existing application programs.  
 
 Availability of Up-to-Date Information: DBMS makes the database available to all users. 
Availability of up-to-date information is essential for many transaction-processing 
applications, such as reservation systems or banking databases 
 Economies of Scale:  DBMS approach permits consolidation of data and applications, to 
overlap between activities of data-processing in different projects or departments. This 
enables the whole organization to invest in more powerful processors, storage devices, or 
communication gear, rather than having each department purchase its equipment thus 
reducing overall costs of operation and management. 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

1.4 History of Database Applications 
 Early Database Applications Using Hierarchical and Network Systems 
Early database applications maintained records in large organizations such as corporations, 
universities, hospitals, and banks. In many of these applications, there 
were large numbers of records of similar structure. There were also many types of records 
and many interrelationships among them.  
Problems with the early database systems 
-  lack of data abstraction and program-data independence capabilities 
-  provided only programming language interfaces. This made it time-consuming and 
expensive to implement new queries and transactions, since new programs had to be 
written, tested, and debugged. 
 Providing Data Abstraction and Application Flexibility with Relational Databases 
            Relational databases were originally proposed to separate the physical storage of data from 
its conceptual representation and to provide a mathematical foundation for data 
representation and querying. The relational data model also introduced high-level query 
languages that provided an alternative to programming language interfaces, making it much 
faster to write new queries. Hence, data abstraction and program-data independence were 
much improved when compared to earlier systems. 
 
 
 Object-Oriented Applications and the Need for More Complex Databases 
            Object-oriented databases (OODBs) mainly used in specialized applications, such as  
engineering design, multimedia publishing, and manufacturing systems. In addition, many 
object-oriented concepts were incorporated into the newer versions of relational DBMSs, 
leading to object-relational database management systems, known as ORDBMSs. 
 Interchanging Data on the Web for E-Commerce Using XML 
The World Wide Web provides a large network of interconnected computers. Users can 
create documents using a Web publishing language, such as HyperText Markup Language 
(HTML), and store these documents on Web servers where other users (clients) can access 
them. Documents can be linked through hyperlinks, which are pointers to other 
documents.  
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

Currently, eXtended Markup Language (XML) is considered to be the primary standard for 
interchanging data among various types of databases and Web pages. XML combines 
concepts from the models used in document systems with database modeling concepts. 
 Extending Database Capabilities for New Applications 
The success of database systems in traditional applications encouraged developers of  other 
types of applications to attempt to use them. The following are some examples of these 
applications: 
Scientific applications that store large amounts of data resulting from    
   Scientific experiments in areas such as high-energy physics, the mapping of the 
human genome, and the discovery of protein structures. 
Storage and retrieval of images, including scanned news or personal  
photographs, satellite photographic images, and images from medical 
procedures such as x-rays and MRIs (magnetic resonance imaging). 
Storage and retrieval of videos, such as movies, and video clips from news 
or personal digital cameras. 
Data mining applications that analyze large amounts of data searching for 
   the occurrences of specific patterns or relationships, and for identifying 
   unusual patterns in areas such as credit card usage. 
Spatial applications that store spatial locations of data, such as weather 
information, maps used in geographical information systems, and in   
automobile navigational systems. 
Time series applications that store information such as economic data at 
                             regular points in time, such as daily sales and monthly gross national   product 
figures. 
 Databases versus Information Retrieval 
Database technology is heavily used in manufacturing, retail, banking, insurance, finance, 
and health care industries, where structured data is collected through forms, such as 
invoices or patient registration documents. An area related to database technology is 
Information Retrieval (IR), which deals with books, manuscripts, and various forms of 
library-based articles. Data is indexed, cataloged, and annotated using keywords. IR is 
concerned with searching for material based on these keywords, and with the many 
problems dealing with document processing and free-form text processing. 
 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

When Not to Use a DBMS 
 DBMS may involve unnecessary overhead costs that would not be incurred in   traditional 
file processing. The overhead costs of using a DBMS are due to the following: 
   High initial investment in hardware, software, and training 
   The generality that a DBMS provides for defining and processing data 
  Overhead for providing security, concurrency control, recovery, and integrity   
functions  
 Therefore, it may be more desirable to use regular files under the following circumstances: 
 Simple, well-defined database applications that are not  expected to change  at all 
 Stringent, real-time requirements for some application programs that may not be 
met because of DBMS overhead 
 Embedded systems with limited storage capacity, where a general-purpose DBMS 
would not fit 
 No multiple-user access to data 
 
 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

Chapter 2: Overview of Database Languages and Architectures 
 
Introduction 
The architecture of DBMS packages has evolved from the early monolithic systems, where the 
whole DBMS software package was one tightly integrated system. Modern DBMS packages are 
modular in design, with a client/server system architecture. In a basic client/server DBMS 
architecture, the system functionality is distributed between two types of module.  A client 
module is designed to run on a user workstation or personal computer. The 
client module handles user interaction and provides the user-friendly interfaces such as forms- or 
menu-based GUIs. The other kind of module, called a server module handles data storage, access, 
search, and other functions 
 
2.1 Data Models, Schemas, and Instances 
Data Model 
A data model is a collection of concepts that can be used to describe the structure of a database. By 
structure of a database we mean the data types, relationships and constraints that apply to the data. 
Most data models also include a set of basic operations for specifying retrievals and updates on the 
database. Data model provides the necessary means to achieve abstraction. 
 
Categories of Data Models 
Data models can be categorized according to the types of concepts they use to describe the 
database structure. 
1. High-level or conceptual data models: provide concepts that are close to the way many 
users perceive data. Conceptual data models use concepts such as entities, attributes, and 
relationships. 
2. Representational or implementation data models: provide concepts that may be easily 
understood by end users but that are not too far removed from the way data is organized in 
computer storage. Representational data models hide many details of data storage on disk 
but can be implemented on a computer system directly. Representational or implementation 
data models are the models used most frequently 
            in traditional commercial DBMSs. These include the widely used relational               
data model, as well as the so-called legacy data models
the network and hierarchical 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

models. Representational data models represent data by using record structures and hence 
are sometimes called record-based data models. 
3. Low-level or physical data models: provide concepts that describe the details of how data 
is stored on the computer storage media, typically magnetic disks. Physical data models 
describe how data is stored as files in the computer by representing            information such 
as record formats, record orderings, and access paths. 
 
Database schema  
The description of a database is called the database schema, which is specified during 
database design and is not expected to change frequently. 
Schema diagram 
      A displayed schema is called a schema diagram. A schema diagram displays only some       
aspects of a schema, such as the names of record types and data items, and some types of 
constraints. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.1: Schema diagram for the database 
  
     Schema construct 
          Each object in the schema is called schema construct. For example student or course. 
 
   
 
 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

  Database state or snapshot 
    The data in the database at a particular moment in time is called a database state or snapshot. It 
is also called the current set of occurrences or instances in the database. In a given database state, 
each schema construct has its own current set of instances; for example, the STUDENT construct 
will contain the set of individual student entities (records) as its instances. 
  The distinction between database schema and database state is very important. When we define a 
new database, we specify its database schema only to the DBMS. At this point, the corresponding 
database state is the empty state with no data. We get the initial state of the database when the 
database is first populated or loaded with the initial data. From then on, every time an update 
operation is applied to the database, we get another database state. At any point in time, the 
database has a current state. 
  The DBMS is partly responsible for ensuring that every state of the database is a valid state
that 
is, a state that satisfies the structure and constraints specified in the schema. The 
   DBMS stores the descriptions of the schema constructs and constraints
also called the meta-
data
in the DBMS catalog so that DBMS software can refer to the schema whenever it needs to. 
The schema is sometimes called the intension, and a database state is called an extension of the 
schema. 
 
2.2 Three-Schema Architecture and Data Independence 
The Three-Schema Architecture 
The goal of the three-schema architecture is to separate the user applications from the physical 
database. In this architecture, schemas can be defined at the following three levels: 
1. The internal level has an internal schema, which describes the physical storage        
structure of the database. The internal schema uses a physical data model and describes the 
complete details of data storage and access paths for the database. 
2.  The conceptual level has a conceptual schema, which describes the structure of the  whole 
database for a community of users. The conceptual schema hides the details of physical 
storage structures and concentrates on describing entities, data types, relationships, user 
operations, and constraints. Usually, a representational data model is used to describe the 
conceptual schema when a database system is implemented.  
 3. The external or view level includes a number of external schemas or user views.  Each 
external schema describes the part of the database that a particular user group is interested 
in and hides the rest of the database from that user group. Each external schema is typically 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

implemented using a representational data model, possibly based on an external schema 
design in a high-level data model. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                     Figure 2.2: The three-schema architecture. 
In a DBMS based on the three-schema architecture, each user group refers to its own external 
schema. Hence, the DBMS must transform a request specified on an external schema into a request 
against the conceptual schema, and then into a request on the internal schema for processing over 
the stored database. If the request is a database retrieval, the data extracted 
 
The processes of transforming requests and results between levels are called mappings. 
 
Data Independence 
Data independence can be defined as the capacity to change the schema at one level of a database 
system without having to change the schema at the next higher level. We can define two types of 
data independence: 
1. Logical data independence is the capacity to change the conceptual schema               
without having to change external schemas or application programs. We may change the 
conceptual schema to expand the database, to change constraints, or to reduce the database. 
Only the view definition and the mappings need to be changed in a DBMS that supports 
logical data independence.  
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

2. Physical data independence is the capacity to change the internal schema without 
having to change the conceptual schema. Hence, the external schemas need not be 
changed as well. Changes to the internal schema may be needed because some physical 
files were reorganized
for example, by creating additional access structures
to 
improve the performance of retrieval or update. 
 
Data independence occurs because when the schema is changed at some level, the schema 
at the next higher level remains unchanged; only the mapping between the two levels is 
changed. 
 
2.3 Database Languages and Interfaces 
          The DBMS must provide appropriate languages and interfaces for each category of     
          users. 
      DBMS Languages 
Once the design of a database is completed and a DBMS is chosen to implement the 
database, the first step is to specify conceptual and internal schemas for the database and any 
mappings between the two.  
 
Data Definition Language (DDL) 
The data definition language (DDL) is used by the DBA and by database designers to 
define both schemas when no strict separation of levels is maintained . The DBMS will have 
a DDL compiler whose function is to process DDL statements in order to identify 
descriptions of the schema constructs and to store the schema description in the DBMS 
catalog. 
 
Storage Definition Language (SDL) 
          Storage definition language is used when clear separation is maintained between the  
conceptual and internal levels, the DDL is used to specify the conceptual schema only. 
          The storage definition language (SDL), is used to specify the internal schema. The 
          mappings between the two schemas may be specified in either one of these languages. 
 
     
 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

 View Definition Language (VDL), 
View definition language is used to specify user views and their mappings to the              
conceptual schema. In relational DBMSs, SQL is used in the role of VDL to define user or 
application views as results of predefined queries. 
 
    Data Manipulation Language (DML) 
    Data manipulation languages (DML) are used to perform manipulation operation such as           
retrieval, insertion, deletion, and modification of the data. There are two main types of DMLs : 
  1. High-level or nonprocedural DML : can be used on its own to specify complex  database 
operations concisely. Many DBMSs allow high-level DML statements either to be entered 
interactively from a display monitor or terminal or to be embedded in a general-purpose 
programming language. In the latter case, DML statements must be identified within the 
program so that they can be extracted by a precompiler and processed by the DBMS. 
High-level DMLs, such as SQL, can specify and retrieve many records in a single DML 
statement; therefore, they are called set-at-a-time or set-oriented DMLs. A query in a 
high-level DML often specifies which data to retrieve rather than how to retrieve it; 
therefore, such languages are also called declarative 
2. Low-level or procedural DML: must be embedded in a general-purpose programming 
language. This type of DML typically retrieves individual records or objects from the 
database and processes each separately. language constructs, such as looping, to retrieve 
and process each record from a set of records. Low-level DMLs are also called record-at-
a-time DMLs because of this property. DL/1, a DML designed for the hierarchical model, 
is a low-level DML that uses commands such as GET UNIQUE, GET NEXT, or GET 
NEXT WITHIN PARENT to navigate from  record to record within a hierarchy of records 
in the database. 
 
Host language 
Whenever DML commands, whether high level or low level, are embedded in a general-       
purpose programming language, that language is called the host language and the DML is 
called the data sublanguage. 
A high-level DML used in a standalone interactive manner is called a query language.  
. 
DBMS Interfaces 
User-friendly interfaces provided by a DBMS may include the following: 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

1. Menu-Based Interfaces for Web Clients or Browsing: These interfaces present            
the user with lists of options (called menus) that lead the user through the formulation           
           of a request. There is no need for the user to memorize the specific commands and     
           syntax of a query language. Pull-down menus are a very popular technique in Web-         
           based user interfaces.   
2. Forms-Based Interfaces: A forms-based interface displays a form to each user. Users can 
fill out all of the form entries to insert new data, or they can fill out only certain entries, in 
which case the DBMS will retrieve matching data for the remaining 
entries. Forms are usually designed and programmed for naive users as interfaces to canned 
transactions. 
3. Graphical User Interfaces: A GUI typically displays a schema to the user in 
diagrammatic form. The user then can specify a query by manipulating the diagram. In 
many cases, GUIs utilize both menus and forms. Most GUIs use a pointing device, 
such as a mouse, to select certain parts of the displayed schema diagram. 
4. Natural Language Interfaces:These interfaces accept requests written in 
English or some other language and attempt to understand them. A natural language 
interface usually has its own schema, which is similar to the database conceptual schema, 
as well as a dictionary of important words. The natural language interface refers to the 
words in its schema, as well as to the set of standard words in its dictionary, to interpret the 
request. If the interpretation is successful, the interface generates a high-level query 
corresponding to the natural language request and submits it to the DBMS for processing; 
otherwise, a dialogue is started with the user 
to clarify the request.  
5. Speech Input and Output: Applications with limited vocabularies such as inquiries for 
telephone directory, flight arrival/departure, and credit card account information are 
allowing speech for input and output to enable customers to access this information. The 
speech input is detected using a library of predefined words and used to set up the 
parameters that are supplied to the queries. For output, a similar conversion from text or 
numbers into speech takes place. 
6. Interfaces for Parametric Users: Parametric users, such as bank tellers, often 
            have a small set of operations that they must perform repeatedly. For example, a 
           teller is able to use single function keys to invoke routine and repetitive transactions 
            such as account deposits or withdrawals, or balance inquiries. Usually a small set of     
            abbreviated commands is included, with the goal of minimizing the number of    
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

            keystrokes required for each request.  
7. Interfaces for the DBA: Most database systems contain privileged commands 
            that can be used only by the DBA staff. These include commands for creating 
            accounts, setting system parameters, granting account authorization, changing a 
            schema, and reorganizing the storage structures of a database. 
        
2.4 The Database System Environment 
2.4.1 DBMS Component Modules 
 
       The top part of the figure refers to the various users of the database environment and    
       their interfaces. The lower part shows the internals of the DBMS responsible for storage    
       of data and processing of transactions. 
       DDL compiler-processes schema definitions, specified in the DDL, and stores            
descriptions of the schemas (meta-data) in the DBMS catalog. 
       Interactive query interface: interface for Casual users and persons with occasional need for 
information from the database. 
     Query compiler- validates for correctness of the query syntax, the names of files and data    
      elements & compiles them into an internal form. 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

Query optimizer 
concerned with the rearrangement and possible reordering of        
operations, elimination of redundancies, and use of correct algorithms and indexes during    
execution. It consults the system catalog for statistical and other physical information         
about the stored data and generates executable code that performs the necessary       operations 
for the query and makes calls on the runtime processor.  
      Precompiler - extracts DML commands from an application program and sends to the  
      DML compiler for compilation into object code for database access. 
     Host language compiler - rest of the program is sent to the host language compiler. The     
    object codes for the DML commands and the rest of the program are linked, forming a    
canned transaction whose executable code includes calls to the runtime database       processor. 
    Runtime database processor executes: 
      (1) the privileged commands 
      (2) the executable query plans, and  
     (3) the canned transactions with runtime parameters. 
 It works with the system catalog and may update it withstatistics. It also works with the stored 
data manager, which in turn uses basic operating system services for carrying out low-level 
input/output (read/write) operations between the disk and main memory. The runtime database 
processor handles other aspects of data transfer, such as management of buffers in the main 
memory. 
   stored data manager uses basic operating system services for carrying out low-level    
   input/output (read/write) operations between the disk and main memory. 
  concurrency control and backup and recovery systems  integrated into the working of the    
  runtime database processor for purposes of transaction management. 
2.4.2  Database System Utilities 
    Database utilities help the DBA to manage the database system. Common utilities 
    have the following types of functions: 
 Loading:  used to load existing data files
such as text files or  sequential files
into the 
database. 
 Backup: creates a backup copy of the database, usually by dumping the entire database onto 
tape or other mass storage medium. The backup copy can be used to restore the database in case 
of catastrophic disk failure. Incremental backups are also often used, where only changes since 
the previous backup are recorded. Incremental backup is more complex, but saves storage 
space. 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

 Database storage reorganization: used to reorganize a set of database files into different 
file organizations, and create new access paths to improve performance. 
 Performance monitoring: monitors database usage and provides statistics to the DBA. The 
DBA uses the statistics in making decisions such as whether or not to reorganize files or 
whether to add or drop indexes to improve performance. 
 
      Other utilities may be available for sorting files, handling data compression, monitoring       
       access by users, interfacing with the network, and performing other functions. 
 
2.4.3 Tools, Application Environments, and Communications Facilities 
 
 Tools 
 CASE : used in the design phase of database systems 
 Data dictionary : In addition to storing catalog information about schemas and 
constraints, the data dictionary stores other information, such as design decisions, 
                  usage standards, application program descriptions, and user information. Such a 
                 system is also called an information repository. This information can be accessed 
                 directly by users or the DBA when needed. 
 Application development environments 
 PowerBuilder (Sybase) or JBuilder (Borland): provide an environment for 
developing database applications including database design, GUI evelopment, querying 
and updating, and application program development. 
 Communications software: allow users at locations remote from the database system 
site to access the database through computer terminals, workstations, or personal 
computers. Integrated DBMS and data communications system is called a DB/DC 
system 
2.5 Centralized and Client/Server Architectures for DBMSs  
          2.5.1 Centralized DBMSs Architecture 
All DBMS functionality, application program execution, and user interface processing     
carried out on one machine 
 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.5.1: A physical centralized architecture 
 
 
 Disadvantages: 
- 
When the central site computer or database system goes down, then 
everyone is blocked from using the system   
- 
Communication costs from the terminals to the central site can expensive 
2.5.2 Basic Client/Server Architectures 
The client/server architecture was developed to deal with computing environments 
in which a large number of PCs, workstations, file servers, printers, database servers, 
Web servers, e-mail servers, and other software and equipment are connected via a 
network. 
 idea  
- define specialized servers with specific functionalities. 
- for example  file server that maintains the files of the client  
machines 
- The resources provided by specialized servers can be accessed by  
                                 many client machines. 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

- The client machines provide the user with the appropriate interfaces    
to utilize these servers and local processing power to run local  
applications 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                Figure 2.5.2(a) : Logical two-tier client/server architecture 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                 Figure2.5.2(b) : Physical two-tier client/server architecture. 
The concept of client/server architecture assumes an underlying framework that consists of many 
PCs and workstations as well as a smaller number of mainframe machines, connected via LANs 
and other types of computer networks. A client is a user machine that provides user interface 
capabilities and local processing. When a client requires access to additional functionality such as 
database access
that does not exist at that machine, it connects to a server that provides the 
needed functionality. A server is a system containing both hardware and software that can provide 
services to the client machines, such as file access, printing, archiving, or database access. 
 
2.5.3 Two-Tier Client/Server Architectures for DBMSs 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

The software components are distributed over two systems: client and server 
  Server handles 
 - Query and transaction functionality related to SQL processing  
  Client handles 
 - User interface programs and application programs 
The user interface programs and application programs can run on the client side. When DBMS 
access is required, the program establishes a connection to the DBMS(which is on the server side) 
once the connection is created, the client program can communicate with the DBMS. 
A client program can actually connect to several RDBMSs and send query and transaction requests 
using the ODBC API, which are then processed at the server sites. Any query results are sent back 
to the client program, which can process and display the results as needed. A related standard for 
the Java programming language, called JDBC, has also been defined to  allow Java client 
programs to access one or more DBMSs through a standard interface 
Object-oriented DBMSs 
The different approach to two-tier client/server architecture was taken by some object-oriented 
DBMSs, where the software modules of the DBMS were divided between client and server in a 
more integrated way.  
 server level 
 may include the part of the DBMS software responsible for  handling data storage on disk 
pages, local concurrency control and recovery, buffering and caching of disk pages. 
 client level  
 may handle the user interface, data dictionary functions, DBMS  interactions with 
programming language compilers, global query optimization, concurrency control, and 
recovery across multiple servers, structuring of complex objects from the data in the 
buffers. 
 In this approach, the client/server interaction is more tightly coupled and is done internally by the 
DBMS modules
some of which reside on the client and some on the server
rather than by the 
users/programmers. 
 
2.5.4 Three-Tier and n-Tier Architectures for Web Applications 
Many Web applications use an architecture called the three-tier architecture, which adds an 
intermediate layer between the client and the database server 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.5.4(a): Logical three-tier client/server architecture 
 
 Client 
- 
 Contain GUI interfaces and some additional  application-specific business rules 
 Application server or the Web server 
-  accepts requests from the client, processes the request and sends  database queries 
and commands to the database server, and then passes  processed data from the 
database server to the clients, where it may be processed further and filtered to be 
presented to users in GUI format. 
- 
forwarding a request to the database server. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.5.4(b): Logical three-tier client/server architecture 
 
Figure 2.5.4(b) shows another architecture used by database and other application package 
vendors. 
 Presentation layer  
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

- displays information to the user and  allows data entry 
 The business logic layer 
-  handles intermediate rules and constraints before data is passed up to  the user or down 
to the DBMS 
- can also act as a Web server, which  retrieves query results from the database server and 
formats them into dynamic Web pages that are viewed by the Web browser at the client 
side 
 The bottom layer 
- includes all data management services 
2.5.5 N-tier Architecture 
It is possible to divide the layers between the user and the stored data further into finer 
components, thereby giving rise to n-tier architectures; where n may be four or five tiers. The 
business logic layer is divided into multiple layers  
 Advantage  
- any one tier can run on an appropriate processor or operating system platform and can be 
handled independently. 
Vendors of ERP (enterprise resource planning) and CRM (customer relationship management) 
packages often use a middleware layer, which accounts for the front-end modules (clients) 
communicating with a number of back-end databases (servers). 
 
2.6 Classification of Database Management Systems 
     Criteria used to classify DBMSs are 
1. Data model on which the DBMS is based 
 Relational: represents a database as a collection of tables, where each table can  be 
stored as a separate file. 
 Object: defines a database in terms of objects, their properties, and their operations. 
Objects with the same structure and behavior belong to a class, and classes are 
organized into hierarchies (or acyclic graphs). The operations of each class are 
specified in terms of predefined procedures called methods. 
 Hierarchical and network (legacy): The network model represents data as record 
types and also represents a limited type of 1:N relationship, called a set type. The 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

hierarchical model represents data as hierarchical tree structures. Each hierarchy 
represents a number of related records. 
 Native XML DBMS: uses hierarchical tree structures. It combines database 
concepts with concepts from document representation models. Data is represented 
as elements; with the use of tags, data can be nested to create complex hierarchical 
structures. 
2. Number of users supported by the system 
 Single-user: support only one user at a time and are mostly used with PCs. 
 Multiuser: support concurrent multiple users. 
3. Number of sites over which the database is distributed 
 Centralized: data is stored at a single computer site 
 Distributed: can have the actual database and DBMS software distributed over 
many sites, connected by a computer network 
- Homogeneous DDBMSs use the same DBMS software at all the sites 
- Heterogeneous DDBMSs can use different DBMS software at each site 
  4. Cost 
 Open source: products like MySQL and PostgreSQL that are supported by third-  
                      party vendors with additional services. 
 Different types of licensing: Standalone single user versions of some systems like 
                                   Microsoft Access are sold per copy or included in the overall configuration of 
a desktop or laptop. In addition, data warehousing and mining features, as 
well as support for additional data types, are made available at extra cost. 
5. On the basis of the types of access path options for storing files 
- One well-known family of DBMSs is based on inverted file structures. 
.6. General purpose or Special purpose 
- When performance is a primary consideration, a special-purpose DBMS can be designed 
and built for a specific application; such a system cannot be used for other applications 
without major changes. Many airline reservations and telephone directory systems 
developed in the past are special-purpose DBMSs.  
Chapter 3: Conceptual Data Modelling using Entities and Relationships 
 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

Introduction 
Conceptual modeling is a very important phase in designing a successful database application.
Entity-Relationship (ER) model is a popular high-level conceptual data model. This model and its 
variations are frequently used for the conceptual design of database applications, and many 
database design tools employ its concepts. 
3.1 Using High-Level Conceptual Data Models for Database Design 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.1: A simplified diagram to illustrate the main phases of database design. 
The first step shown is requirements collection and analysis. During this step, the database 
designers interview prospective database users to understand and document their data 
requirements
 
These requirements should be specified in as detailed and complete a form as possible. In parallel 
with specifying the data requirements, it is useful to specify the known functional requirements 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

of the application. These consist of the userdefined operations (or transactions) that will be 
applied to the database, including both retrievals and updates. 
 
Once the requirements have been collected and analyzed, the next step is to create a conceptual 
schema for the database, using a high-level conceptual data model. This step is called conceptual 
design. The conceptual schema is a concise description of the data requirements of the users and 
includes detailed descriptions of the entity types, relationships, and constraints; these are expressed 
using the concepts provided by the high-level data model. 
 
The next step in database design is the actual implementation of the database, using a commercial 
DBMS. Most current commercial DBMSs use an implementation data model
such as the 
relational or the object-relational database model
so the conceptual schema is transformed from 
the high-level data model into the implementation data model. This step is called logical design or 
data model mapping; its result is a database schema in the implementation data model of the 
DBMS.  
 
The last step is the physical design phase, during which the internal storage structures, file 
organizations, indexes, access paths, and physical design parameters for the database files are 
specified. In parallel with these activities, application programs are designed and implemented as 
database transactions corresponding to the highlevel transaction specifications. 
 
3.2 Entity Types, Entity Sets, Attributes, and Keys 
 
The ER model describes data as entities, relationships, and attributes. 
3.2.1 Entities and Attributes 
     Entity:   a thing in the real world with an independent existence. An entity may be an object 
with a physical existence (for example, a particular person, car, house, or employee) or it may 
be an object with a conceptual existence (for instance, a company, a job, or a university 
course). 
 
 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

Attributes:  Particular properties that describe entity.  For example, an EMPLOYEE entity may 
be described by the 
. 
 
Figure 3.2.1(a): Two entities, EMPLOYEE e1, and COMPANY c1, and their attributes 
 
      Types of attributes: 
1.Composite versus Simple (Atomic) Attributes 
2.Single-valued versus multivalued 
3.Stored versus derived 
4.NULL values 
5.Complex attributes 
1. Composite versus Simple (Atomic) Attributes 
Composite Attributes can be divided into smaller subparts, which represent more basic 
attributes with independent meanings.For example, the Address attribute of the 
EMPLOYEE entity can be subdivided into Street_address, City, State, and Zip. 
Composite attributes can form a hierarchy. For example, Street_address can be further 
subdivided 
into 
three 
simple 
component 
attributes: 
Number, 
Street, 
and 
Apartment_number. The value of a composite attribute is the concatenation of the values of 
its component simple attributes. 
 
  
Figure 3.2.1(b): A hierarchy of 
   
composite attributes. 
 
 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

Attributes that are not divisible are called simple or atomic attributes. Example SSN of an 
employee. 
 
2. Single-Valued versus Multivalued Attributes 
Attributes that have a single value for a particular entity are called single-valued. For example, 
Age is a single-valued attribute of a person. 
Attributes that can have a set of values for a particular entity are called Multivalued Attributes. 
For example Colors attribute for a car, or a College_degrees attribute for a person. A multivalued 
attribute may have lower and upper bounds to constrain the number of values allowed for each 
individual entity. For example, the Colors attribute of a car may be restricted to have between one 
and three values, if we assume that a car can have three colors at most. 
 
3. Stored versus Derived Attributes 
An attribute, which cannot be derived from other attribute are called stored attribute. For 
example, Birth_Date of an employee 
Attributes derived from other stored attribute are called derived attribute.  For example age of an 
 
 
4. Null Value Attribute(Optional Attribute) 
In some cases, a particular entity may not have an applicable value for an attribute. For example, 
the Apartment_number attribute of an address applies only to addresses that are in apartment 
buildings and not to other types of residences, such as single-family homes. Similarly, a 
College_degrees attribute applies only to people with college degrees. For such situations, a 
special value called NULL is created. An address of a single-family home would have NULL for 
its Apartment_number attribute, and a person with no college degree would have NULL for 
College_degrees. NULL can also be used if we do not know the value of an attribute for a 
particular entity 
 
5. Complex Attributes 
If an attribute for an entity, is built using composite and multivalued attributes, then these 
attributes are called complex attributes. For example, a person can have more than one residence 
and each residence can have multiple phones, an addressphone for a person entity can be specified 
as : 
    {   Addressphone (phone {(Area Code, Phone Number)},     
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

         Address(Sector Address (Sector Number,House Number),      
           City, State, Pin)) 
     } 
    Here {} are used to enclose multivalued attributes and () are used to enclose composite   
   attributes with comma separating individual attributes 
 
3.2.2 Entity Types, Entity Sets, Keys, and Value Sets 
Entity Types  
An entity type defines a collection (or set) of entities that have the same attributes. Each entity 
type in the database is described by its name and attributes. For example, a company employing 
hundreds of employees may want to store similar information concerning each of the employees. 
These employee entities share the same attributes, but each entity has its own value(s) for each 
attribute. 
 
Entity Sets 
The collection of all entities of a particular entity type in the database at any point in time is called 
an entity set; the entity set is usually referred to using the same name as the entity type. For 
example, EMPLOYEE refers to both a type of entity as well as the current set of all employee 
entities in the database. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.2.2(a): Two entity types, EMPLOYEE and COMPANY, and some member entities of each. 
 
 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

An entity type describes the schema or intension for a set of entities that share the same structure. 
The collection of entities of a particular entity type is grouped into  an entity set, which is also 
called the extension of the entity type. 
An entity type is represented in ER diagrams a rectangular box enclosing the entity type name. 
Attribute names are enclosed in ovals and are attached to their entity type by straight lines. 
Composite attributes are attached to their component attributes by straight lines.  Multivalued 
attributes are displayed in double ovals 
 
 
Key Attributes of an Entity Type 
An entity type usually has one or more attributes whose values are distinct for each individual 
entity in the entity set. Such an attribute is called a key attribute, and its values can be used to 
identify each entity uniquely. For example, the Name attribute is a key of the COMPANY entity 
because no two companies are allowed to have the same name. 
In ER diagrammatic notation, each key attribute has its name underlined inside the oval.Some 
entity types have more than one key attribute.  For example, each of the Vehicle_id and 
Registration attributes of the entity type CAR  is a key in its own right 
 
Example:  The CAR entity type with two key attributes, Registration and   Vehicle_id. 
Figure 3.2.2(b) : ER diagram notation                               Entity set with three entities. 
 
Value Sets (Domains) of Attributes 
Each simple attribute of an entity type is associated with a value set (or domain of values), which 
specifies the set of values that may be assigned to that attribute for each individual entity. For 
example, if the range of ages allowed for employees is between 16 and 70, we can specify the 
value set of the Age attribute of  EMPLOYEE to be the set of integer numbers between 16 and 70. 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

Value sets are not displayed in ER diagrams, and are    specified using the basic data types 
available in most programming languages, such as integer, string, Boolean,float, enumerated type, 
subrange, and so on. 
Mathematically, an attribute A of entity set E whose value set is V can be defined as a  function 
from E to the power set  P(V) of V: 
.We refer to the value of attribute A for entity e 
as A(e).A NULL value is represented by the empty set. 
 
3.3 A Sample Database Application 
Miniworld : COMPANY 
mployees, departments, and 
projects. 
 After the requirements collection and analysis phase, the database designers provide the 
following description of the miniworld: 
 The company is organized into departments.  
 Each department has a unique name, a unique number, and a particular employee who 
manages the department.We keep track of the start date when that employee began 
managing the department. A department may have several locations. 
 A department controls a number of projects, each of which has a unique name, a unique 
number, and a single location. 
 
date.  
 An employee is assigned to one department, but may work on several projects, which are 
not necessarily controlled by the same department.  
 We keep track of the current number of hours per week that an employee works on each 
project. We also keep track of the direct supervisor of each employee (who is another 
employee). 
 We want to keep track of the dependents of each employee for insurance purposes. We 
 
 
 
 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.3(a): Preliminary design of entity types for the COMPANY database. Some of the shown 
attributes will be refined into relationships. 
 
3.4 Relationship Types, Relationship Sets, Roles, and Structural Constraints 
 
There are several implicit relationships among the various entity types. Whenever an attribute of one 
entity type refers to another entity type, some relationship exists. For example 
  The attribute Manager of DEPARTMENT refers to an  employee  who manages the department 
 The attribute Controlling department of PROJECT refers to the department that controls the 
project 
 The attribute Supervisor of EMPLOYEE refers to another employee -the one who supervises this 
employee 
 The attribute Department of EMPLOYEE refers to the department for which the employee works 
In the ER model, these references should not be represented as attributes but as relationships 
 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

3.4.1 Relationship Types, Sets, and Instances 
A relationship type R among n entity types E1, E2, ..., En defines a set of associations
or a relationship 
set
among entities from these entity types. Entity types and Entity sets, a Relationship type and its 
corresponding Relationship set are usually referred to by the same name, R. 
Mathematically, the relationship set R is a set of relationship instances ri , where each ri  associates n 
individual entities (e1, e2, ..., en), and each entity ei  in ri  is a member of entity set Ej , 
. Each of the 
entity types E1, E2, ..., En is said to participate in the relationship type R. similarly, each of the individual 
entities e1, e2, ..., en is said to      participate in the relationship instance ri  = (e1, e2, ..., en ) 
  
Informally, each relationship instance ri in R is an association of entities, where the association includes 
exactly one entity from each participating entity type. For example, consider a relationship type 
WORKS_FOR between the two entity types EMPLOYEE and DEPARTMENT, which associates each 
employee with the department for which the employee works in the corresponding entity set. Each 
relationship instance in the relationship set WORKS_FOR associates one EMPLOYEE entity and one 
DEPARTMENT entity. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.4.1: Some instances in the WORKS_FOR relationship set, which represents a relationship type 
WORKS_FOR between EMPLOYEE and DEPARTMENT. 
 
employees  e1 , e3, and e6 work for department d1.  employees e2 and e4 work for department d2  and  
employees e5 and e7 work for department d3. 
 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

In ER diagrams, relationship types are displayed as diamond-shaped boxes, which are connected by 
straight lines to the rectangular boxes representing the participating entity types. The relationship name is 
displayed in the diamond-shaped box. 
 
3.4.2 Relationship Degree, Role Names, and Recursive Relationships 
Degree of a Relationship Type 
The degree of a relationship type is the number of participating entity types. A relationship type of 
degree two is called binary, and one of  degree three is called ternary   An example of a binary 
relationship WORKS_FOR  and ternary relationship is SUPPLY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.4.2(a): Some relationship instances in the SUPPLY ternary relationship set. 
 
Each relationship instance ri  associates three entities
a supplier s, a part p and a project j
whenever s 
supplies part p to project j. 
 
Relationships as Attributes 
It is sometimes convenient to think of a binary relationship type in terms of attributes. Consider the 
WORKS_FOR relationship type. One can think of an attribute called Department of the EMPLOYEE 
entity type, where the value of Department for each EMPLOYEE entity is a reference to the 
DEPARTMENT entity for which that employee works. This concept of representing relationship types as 
attributes is used in a class of data models called functional data models. 
In relational databases, foreign keys are a type of reference attribute used to represent relationships. 
 
Role Names and Recursive Relationships 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

Each entity type that participates in a relationship type plays a particular role in the relationship. 
The role name signifies the role that a participating entity from the entity type plays in each relationship 
instance, and helps to explain what the relationship means.For example, in the WORKS_FOR relationship 
type, EMPLOYEE plays the role of employee or worker and DEPARTMENT plays the role of 
department or employer. 
 
Role names are not technically necessary in relationship types where all the participating entity types are 
distinct, since each participating entity type name can be used as the role name. However, in some cases 
the same entity type participates more than once in a relationship type in different roles.  
In such cases the role name becomes essential for distinguishing the meaning of the role that each 
participating entity plays. Such relationship types are called recursive relationships. Example of 
recursive relationships : SUPERVISION relationship type 
 
The SUPERVISION relationship type relates an employee to a supervisor, where both employee and 
supervisor entities are members of the same EMPLOYEE entity set. Hence, the EMPLOYEE entity type 
participates twice in SUPERVISION: once in the role of supervisor (or boss), and once in the role of 
supervisee (or subordinate). Each relationship instance ri  in SUPERVISION associates two employee 
entities ej   and ek , one of which plays the role of supervisor and the other the role of supervisee. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.4.2(b):  
A recursive relationship 
SUPERVISION between EMPLOYEE in the supervisor role (1) and EMPLOYEE in the subordinate role 
(2). 
3.4.3 Constraints on Binary Relationship Types 
Relationship types usually have certain constraints that limit the possible combinations of entities that 
may participate in the corresponding relationship set. These constraints are determined from the 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

miniworld situation that the relationships represent.For example, if the company has a rule that each 
employee     must work for exactly one department, then we would like to describe this constraint in the 
schema. Two main types of binary relationship constraints:  
1.   cardinality ratio     
2.   participation. 
 
Cardinality Ratios for Binary Relationships 
The cardinality ratio for a binary relationship specifies the maximum number of relationship instances that 
an entity can participate in. For example, in the WORKS_FOR binary relationship type, 
DEPARTMENT:EMPLOYEE is of cardinality ratio 1:N, meaning that each department can be related to 
any number of employees, but an employee can be related to (work for) only one department. The 
possible cardinality ratios for binary relationship types are 1:1, 1:N, N:1, and M:N. 
 
Example of a 1:1 binary relationship 
 MANAGES which relates a department entity to the employee who manages that department 
  This represents the miniworld constraints that
at any point in time
an employee can manage one 
department only and a department can have one manager only 
 
 
 
 
 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

Example of a M:N binary relationship 
 
The relationship type WORKS_ON is of cardinality ratio M:N, because the mini-world rule is that 
an employee can work on several projects and a project can have several employees. 
 
Cardinality ratios for binary relationships are represented on ER diagrams by displaying 1, M, and N 
on the diamonds 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Participation Constraints and Existence Dependencies 
The participation constraint specifies whether the existence of an entity depends on its being related to 
another entity via the relationship type. This constraint specifies the minimum number of relationship 
instances that each entity can participate in, and is sometimes called the minimum cardinality 
constraint.There are two types of participation constraints: 
 
 Total     
 
  Partial 
Total participation 
If a company policy states that every employee must work for a department, then an employee entity can 
exist only if it participates in at least one WORKS_FOR relationship Instance. Thus, the participation of 
EMPLOYEE in WORKS_FOR is called total participation, meaning that every entity in the total set of 
employee entities must be related to a department entity via WORKS_FOR. Total participation is also 
called existence dependency 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

Partial participation 
we do not expect every employee to manage a department .So the participation of EMPLOYEE in the 
MANAGES relationship type is partial, meaning that some or part of the set of employee entities are 
related to some department entity via MANAGES, but not necessarily all. 
In ER diagrams, total participation is displayed as a double line connecting the participating entity type 
to the relationship, whereas partial participation is represented by a single line. 
cardinality ratio  +   participation constraints  =  structural constraints of a relationship type. 
3.4.4 Attributes of Relationship Types 
Relationship types can also have attributes, similar to those of entity types. For example, to record the 
number of hours per week that an employee works on a particular project, we can include an attribute 
Hours for the WORKS_ON relationship type. Another example is to include the date on which a manager 
started managing a department via an attribute Start_date for the MANAGES relationship type. 
Attributes of 1:1 or 1:N relationship types can be migrated to one of the participating entity types. For a 
1:N relationship type, a relationship attribute can be migrated only to the entity type on the N-side of the 
relationship. For M:N relationship types, some attributes may be determined by the combination of 
participating entities in a relationship instance, not by any single entity.  Such attributes must be specified 
as relationship attributes. 
3.5 Weak Entity Types 
Entity types that do not have key attributes of their own are called weak entity types. Entities belonging 
to a weak entity type are identified by being related to specific entities from another entity type in 
combination with one of their attribute values. We call this other entity type the identifying or owner 
entity type.  We call the relationship type that relates a weak entity type to its owner the identifying 
relationship of the weak entity type. 
Consider the entity type DEPENDENT, related to EMPLOYEE, which is used to keep track of the 
dependents of each employee via a 1:N relationship. In our example, the attributes of DEPENDENT are 
Name,Birth_date, gender, and Relationship (to the employee). Two dependents of two distinct employees 
may, by chance, have the same values for Name, Birth_date, gender, and Relationship, but they are still 
distinct entities. They are identified as distinct entities only after determining the particular employee 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

entity to which each dependent is related. Each employee entity is said to own the dependent entities that 
are related to it. 
 
A weak entity type always has a total participation constraint (existence dependency) with respect to its 
identifying relationship because a weak entity cannot be identified without an owner entity. A weak entity 
type normally has a partial key, which is the attribute that can uniquely identify weak entities that are 
related to the same owner entity. In our example, if we assume that no two dependents of the same 
employee ever have the same first name, the attribute Name of DEPENDENT is the partial key.  
 
In ER diagrams, both a weak entity type and its identifying relationship are distinguished by surrounding 
their boxes and diamonds with double lines. The partial key attribute is underlined with a dashed or dotted 
line. 
3.6 ER Diagrams, Naming Conventions, and Design Issues 
3.6.1 Summary of Notation for ER Diagrams 
 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

3.6.2 
Prope
r 
Nami
ng of 
Sche
ma 
Const
ructs 
 
C
hoose 
names 
that 
convey, 
as 
much 
as 
possibl
e, the meanings attached to the different constructs in the schema. 
 Use singular names for entity types,rather than plural ones, because the entity type name 
applies to each individual entity belonging to that entity type 
 In ER diagrams, entity type and relationship type names are uppercase letters, attribute names 
have their initial letter capitalized, and role names are lowercase letters. 
 As a general practice, given a narrative description of the database requirements, the nouns 
appearing in the narrative tend to give rise to entity type names, and the verbs tend to indicate 
names of relationship types. Attribute names generally arise from additional nouns that 
describe the nouns corresponding to entity types. 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

 Another naming consideration involves choosing binary relationship names to make the ER 
diagram of the schema readable from left to right and from top to bottom. 
 
3.6.3 Design Choices for ER Conceptual Design 
In general, the schema design process should be considered an iterative refinement process, where 
an initial design is created and then iteratively refined until the most suitable design is reached. 
Some of the refinements that are often used include the following: 
 A concept may be first modeled as an attribute and then refined into a relationship because 
it is determined that the attribute is a reference to another entity type. It is often the case 
that a pair of such attributes that are inverses of one another are refined into a binary 
relationship. 
 Similarly, an attribute that exists in several entity types may be elevated or promoted to an 
independent entity type. For example, suppose that several entity types in a UNIVERSITY 
database, such as STUDENT, INSTRUCTOR, and COURSE, each has an attribute 
Department in the initial design; the designer may then choose to create an entity type 
DEPARTMENT with a single attribute Dept_name and relate it to the three entity types 
(STUDENT, INSTRUCTOR, and COURSE) via appropriate relationships. 
 An inverse refinement to the previous case may be applied
for example, if an entity type 
DEPARTMENT exists in the initial design with a single attribute Dept_name and is related 
to only one other entity type, STUDENT. In this case, DEPARTMENT may be reduced or 
demoted to an attribute of STUDENT. 
 
3.6.4 Alternative Notations for ER Diagrams 
There are many alternative diagrammatic notations for displaying ER diagrams. One alternative 
ER notation for specifying structural constraints on relationships, which replaces the cardinality 
ratio (1:1, 1:N, M:N) and single/double line notation for participation constraints. This notation 
involves associating a pair of integer numbers (min, max) with each participation of an entity type 
E in a relationship type R
 
The numbers mean that for each entity e in E, e must participate in at least min and at most max 
relationship instances in R at any point in time. In this method, min = 0 implies partial 
participation, whereas min > 0 implies total participation. 
 
 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

 
Figure 3.6.4 (a) : ER diagram for Company Database 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

 
 
Figure 3.6.4(b): ER diagram for Company Database (using alternative notation) 
 
 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

3.7 Relationship Types of Degree Higher than Two 
 
3.7.1 Choosing between Binary and Ternary (or Higher-Degree) Relationships 
A relationship type R of degree n will have n edges in an ER diagram, one connecting R to each 
participating entity type 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig 3.7.1(a): The SUPPLY relationship 
 Figure 3.7.1(a0 shows the ER diagram notation for a ternary relationship. SUPPLY is a set of 
relationship instances (s, j, p), where s is a SUPPLIER who is currently supplying a PART p to a 
PROJECT j. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig 3.7.1 (b) ER diagram for three binary relationship types CAN_SUPPLY, USES, and 
SUPPLIES 
 
 
Figure 3.7.1(b) shows an ER diagram for three binary relationship types CAN_SUPPLY, USES, 
and SUPPLIES. CAN_SUPPLY between SUPPLIER and PART, includes an instance (s, p) 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

whenever supplier s can supply part p (to any project). USES between PROJECT and PART, 
includes an instance ( j, p) whenever project j uses part p. SUPPLIES between SUPPLIER and 
PROJECT, includes an instance (s, j) whenever supplier s supplies some part to project j. 
Some database design tools are based on variations of the ER model that permit only binary 
relationships. In this case, a ternary relationship such as SUPPLY must be represented as a weak 
entity type, with no partial key and with three identifying relationships. 
 
 
Fig 
3.7.
1(c
): 
SU
PP
LY 
rep
res
ent
ed 
as a 
we
ak entity type 
 
The three participating entity types SUPPLIER, PART, and PROJECT are together the owner 
entity types.Hence, an entity in the weak entity type is identified by the combination of its three 
owner entities from SUPPLIER, PART, and PROJECT. 
 
3.7.2 Constraints on Ternary (or Higher-Degree) Relationships 
There are two notations for specifying structural constraints on n-ary relationships 
1. based on the cardinality ratio notation of binary  relationships displayed 
 - 1, M, or N is specified on each participation arc (both M and N  symbols stand for    
    many or any number) 
2. based on the (min, max) notation 
- specifies that each entity is related to at least min and at most max relationship  
   instances in the relationship set 
 
 
 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

3.8 Specialization and Generalization 
3.8.1 Specialization 
Specialization is the process of defining a set of subclasses of an entity type; this entity type is 
called the superclass of the specialization. The set of subclasses that forms a specialization is 
defined on the basis of some distinguishing characteristic of the entities in the superclass.  
 
For example, the set of subclasses {SECRETARY, ENGINEER, TECHNICIAN} is a 
specialization of the superclass EMPLOYEE that distinguishes among employee entities based on 
the job type of each employee entity. We may have several specializations of the same entity type 
based on different distinguishing characteristics. For example, another specialization of the 
EMPLOYEE entity type may yield the set of subclasses {SALARIED_EMPLOYEE, 
HOURLY_EMPLOYEE}; this specialization distinguishes among employees based on the method 
of pay. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.8.1(a): EER diagram notation to represent subclasses and specialization. 
Figure 3.8.1(a) shows how we represent a specialization diagrammatically in an EER diagram. The 
subclasses that define a specialization are attached by lines to a circle that represents the 
specialization, which is connected in turn to the superclass. The subset symbol on each line 
connecting a subclass to the circle indicates the direction of the superclass/subclass relationship.5 
Attributes that apply only to entities of a particular subclass
such as TypingSpeed of 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

SECRETARY
are attached to the rectangle representing that subclass. These are called specific 
attributes (or local attributes) of the subclass. 
 
Similarly, a subclass can participate in specific relationship types, such as the 
HOURLY_EMPLOYEE subclass participating in the BELONGS_TO relationship in Figure 
Figure 3.8.1(b). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.8.1(b): Instances of a  specialization 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.8.1 (b) shows a few entity instances that belong to subclasses of the {SECRETARY, 
ENGINEER, TECHNICIAN} specialization. An entity that belongs to a subclass represents the 
same real-world entity as the entity connected to it in the EMPLOYEE superclass, even though the 
same entity is shown twice; for example, e1 is shown in both EMPLOYEE and SECRETARY. 
There are two main reasons for including class/subclass relationships and specializations in a data 
model.  
 The first is that certain attributes may apply to some but not all entities of the superclass. A 
subclass is defined in order to group the entities to which these attributes apply. The 
members of the subclass may still share the majority of their attributes with the other 
members of the superclass. 
 The second reason for using subclasses is that some relationship types may be participated 
in only by entities that are members of the subclass. For example, if only 
HOURLY_EMPLOYEES can belong to a trade union, we can represent that fact by 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

creating the subclass HOURLY_EMPLOYEE of EMPLOYEE and relating the subclass to 
an entity type TRADE_UNION via the BELONGS_TO relationship type 
In summary, the specialization process allows us to do the following: 
 Define a set of subclasses of an entity type 
 Establish additional specific attributes with each subclass 
 Establish additional specific relationship types between each subclass and other entity types 
or other subclasses 
3.8.2 Generalization 
Generalization process can be viewed as being functionally the inverse of the specialization 
process. It is a process of defining a generalized entity type from the given entity types. 
Generalization is the reverse process of abstraction in which we suppress the differences among 
several entity types, identify their common features, and generalize them into a single superclass 
 
For example, consider the entity types CAR and TRUCK shown in Figure 3.8.2(a).  
 
Figure 3.8.2(a): Two entity types, CAR and TRUCK 
Figure 3.8.2(b): Generalizing CAR and TRUCK into the superclass VEHICLE. 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

Because they have several common attributes, they can be generalized into the entity type 
VEHICLE, as shown in Figure 3.8.2(b). Both CAR and TRUCK are now subclasses of the 
generalized superclass VEHICLE. 
A diagrammatic notation to distinguish between generalization and specialization is used in some 
design methodologies. An arrow pointing to the generalized superclass represents a generalization, 
whereas arrows pointing to the specialized subclasses represent a specialization. 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

Question Bank 
1. Define the following terms:  
i) data      ii) database       iii) DBMS      iv) program-data independence    v) Canned 
transaction 
2. Define the database and briefly explain the implicit properties of the database. 
3. Discuss the main Characteristics of the database approach and how does it differ from 
Traditional file systems?  
4. What are the different types of database end users? Discuss the main activities of each. 
5. Breifly discuss the advantages of using the DBMS. 
6. Define the following terms: 
i) data mode  ii) database schema      iii) database state  iv) schema diagram  
7. Describe the three-schema architecture. Why do we need mappings between schema 
levels? 
8. What is the difference between logical data independence and physical data independence?  
9.  What is the difference between procedural and nonprocedural DMLs? 
10. Discuss the various database languages. 
11. Discuss the different types of user-friendly interfaces and the types of users who typically 
use each. 
12. Explain the component modules of DBMS and their interaction with the help of a diagram. 
13. Discuss some types of database utilities and tools and their functions. 
14. Explain two-tier and three-tier architecture. 
15. Discuss the classification of database management systems. 
16. Explain with a neat diagram, the phases of database design. 
17. Define the following terms: 
i)  Entity  ii)  attribute   iii)  entity type  iv)entity set v) key attribute vi) value set  
v)degree of a relationship type  vi) role names  vii) cardinality ratio    viii) participation 
constraints  
18. Explain the different types of attributes that occur in an ER model with an example. 
19. What is meant by a recursive relationship type? Give some examples of recursive 
relationship types. 
20. What is a weak entity type? Explain the role of partial key in the design of weak entity 
type. 
21. List symbols used in ER diagram and their meaning.  
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

22. Discuss the naming conventions used for ER schema diagrams. 
23. Explain with an example specialization and generalization. 
24. Design an ER diagram for an insurance company. Assume suitable entity types like 
CUSTOMER, AGENT, BRANCH, POLICY, PAYEMENT and the relationship between 
them. 
25. Design an ER - diagram for the Movie - database considering the following requirements: 
i) Each Movie is identifies by its title and year of release, it has length in minutes and can 
    have zero of more quotes, language. 
ii) Production companies are identified by Name, they have address, and each production 
    company can produce one or more movies. 
iii) Actors are identified by Name and Date of Birth, they can act in one or more movies 
and 
     each actor has a role in a movie. 
iv) Directors are identified by Name and Date of Birth, so each Director can direct one or 
     more movie and each movie can be directed by one or more Directors. 
v) Each movie belongs to anyone category like Horror, action, Drama, etc. 
26. Design an Entity Relationship (ER) model for a college database . Say we have the    
       following  statements.  
1. 
A college contains many departments 
2. 
Each department can offer any number of courses 
3. 
Many instructors can work in a department 
4. 
An instructor can work only in one department 
5. 
For each department there is a Head 
6. 
An instructor can be head of only one department 
7. 
Each instructor can take any number of courses 
8. 
A course can be taken by only one instructor 
9. 
A student can enroll for any number of courses  
10. Each course can have any number of students 
27.Consider the following set of requirements for a UNIVERSITY database that is used to    
      keep track 
 
number,  current address and phone number, permanent address and phone number, birth 
date, sex, class (freshman, sophomore, ..., graduate), major department, minor department 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

(if any), and degree program (B.A., B.S., ..., Ph.D.). Some user applications need to refer to 
name. Both Social Security number and student number have unique values for each 
student. 
         b. Each department is described by a name, department code, office number, office phone   
             number, and college. Both name and code have unique values for each department. 
         c. Each course has a course name, description, course number, number of semester hours,   
             level, and offering department. The value of the course number is unique for each course. 
         d. Each section has an instructor, semester, year, course, and section number. The section    
 number distinguishes sections of the same course that are taught during the same              
semester/year; its values are 1, 2, 3, ..., up to the number of sections taught during each 
semester.  
e. A grade report has a student, section, letter grade, and numeric grade (0, 1, 2, 3, or 4). 
  
           Design an ER schema for this application, and draw an ER diagram for the schema. Specify   
           key  attributes of each entity type, and structural constraints on each relationship type. Note   
          any  unspecified  requirements, and make appropriate assumptions to make the specification    
          complete. 
28. Write ER diagram for Airline reservation and Ban database 
 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]
