 
 
5.8 Introduction to Concurrency Control 
  Purpose of Concurrency Control 
 
To enforce Isolation (through mutual exclusion) among conflicting transactions.  
 
To preserve database consistency through consistency preserving execution of 
transactions. 
 
To resolve read-write and write-write conflicts. 
 Example:  
 In concurrent execution environment if T1 conflicts with T2 over a data item A, then 
the existing concurrency control decides if T1 or T2 should get the A and if the other 
transaction is rolled-back or waits.   
5.9 Two-Phase Locking Techniques for Concurrency Control 
 The concept of locking data items is one of the main techniques used for controlling the 
concurrent execution of transactions. 
 A lock is a variable associated with a data item in the database. Generally there is a lock 
for each data item in the database. 
 A lock describes the status of the data item with respect to possible operations that can be 
applied to that item.  
 It is used for synchronizing the access by concurrent transactions to the database items. 
 A transaction locks an object before using it 
 When an object is locked by another transaction, the requesting transaction must wait 
5.9.1 Types of Locks and System Lock Tables 
1. Binary Locks 
 A binary lock can have two states or values: locked and unlocked (or 1 
and 0). 
 If the value of the lock on X is 1, item X cannot be accessed by a database 
operation that requests the item
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]
Module-5: Concurrency Control in Databases

  If the value of the lock on X is 0, the item can be accessed when 
requested, and the lock value is changed to 1 
 We refer to the current value (or state) of the lock associated with item X 
as lock(X). 
 Two operations, lock_item and unlock_item, are used with binary 
locking. 
 A transaction requests access to an item X by first issuing a lock_item(X) 
operation 
  If LOCK(X) = 1, the transaction is forced to wait. 
  If LOCK(X) = 0, it is set to 1 (the transaction locks the item) and the 
transaction is allowed to access item X
 When the transaction is through using the item, it issues an 
unlock_item(X) operation, which sets LOCK(X) back to 0 (unlocks the 
item) so that X may be accessed by other transactions 
 Hence, a binary lock enforces mutual exclusion on the data item. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig: 2.1.1 Lock and unlock operations for binary licks. 
 
 
lock_item(X): 
B: if LOCK(X) = 0 (* item is unlocked *)
    then LOCK(X) 
 
   else 
   begin 
             wait (until LOCK(X) = 0 
             and the lock manager wakes up the transaction); 
              go to B 
    end; 
unlock_item(X): 
LOCK(X
if any transactions are waiting 
then wakeup one of the waiting transactions
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

 
The lock_item and unlock_item operations must be implemented as indivisible units that 
is, no interleaving  should be allowed once a lock or unlock operation is started until the 
operation terminates or the transaction waits
 
The wait command within the lock_item(X) operation is usually implemented by putting 
the transaction in a waiting queue for item X until X is unlocked and the transaction can 
be granted access to it  
 
Other transactions that also want to access X are placed in the same queue.Hence, the 
wait command is considered to be outside the lock_item operation. 
 
It is quite simple to implement a binary lock; all that is needed is a binary-valued 
variable, LOCK, associated with each data item X in the database 
 
 In its simplest form, each lock can be a record with three fields: <Data_item_name, 
LOCK, Locking_transaction> plus a queue for transactions that are waiting to access the 
item 
 
If the simple binary locking scheme described here is used, every transaction must obey 
the following rules: 
      1. A transaction 
T must issue the operation lock_item(X) before any               
read_item(X) or write_item(X) operations are performed in T. 
      2. 
A 
transaction 
T 
must 
issue the operation unlock_item(X) 
after all            
read_item(X) and write_item(X) operations are completed in T. 
3. A transaction T will not issue a lock_item(X) operation if it already holds the lock 
on item X. 
4. A transaction T will not issue an unlock_item(X) operation unless it  already  holds 
the lock on item X. 
 
2. Shared/Exclusive (or Read/Write) Locks 
 
binary locking scheme is too restrictive for database items because at most, one 
transaction can hold a lock on a given item 
 
should allow several transactions to access the same item X if they all access X for 
reading purposes only 
 
if a transaction is to write an item X, it must have exclusive access to X 
 
For this purpose, a different type of lock called a multiple-mode lock is used 
 
 In this scheme
called shared/exclusive or read/write locks
there are three locking 
operations: read_lock(X), write_lock(X), and unlock(X). 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

 
A read-locked item is also called share-locked because other transactions are allowed 
to read the item, whereas a write-locked item is called exclusive-locked because a 
single transaction exclusively holds the lock on the item 
 
Method to implement read/write lock is to
     -  keep track of the number of transactions that hold a shared (read) lock  
         on an item in the lock table 
     -  Each record in the lock table will have four fields:
         <Data_item_name, LOCK, No_of_reads, Locking_transaction(s)>. 
 
If LOCK(X)=write-locked, the value of locking_transaction(s) is a single transaction that 
holds the exclusive (write) lock on X 
 
 If LOCK(X)=read-locked, the value of locking transaction(s) is a list of one or more 
transactions that hold the shared (read) lock on X.
 
 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 When we use the shared/exclusive locking scheme, the system must enforce the following 
rules: 
1. A transaction T must issue the operation read_lock(X) or  write_lock(X)  before any   
read_item(X) operation is performed in T. 
2. A transaction T must issue the operation write_lock(X) before any  write_item(X)  
operation is performed in T. 
3 A transaction T must issue the operation unlock(X) after all read_item(X) and      
write_item(X) operations are completed in T.3
     4. A transaction T will not issue a read_lock(X) operation if it already holds a read (shared) 
lock or a write (exclusive) lock on item X. 
Conversion of Locks 
 
A transaction that already holds a lock on item X is allowed under certain conditions to 
convert the lock from one locked state to another 
 
For example, it is possible for a transaction T to issue a read_lock(X) and then later to 
upgrade the lock by issuing a write_lock(X) operation 
       - If T is the only transaction holding a read lock on X at the time it issues   
         the write_lock(X) operation, the lock can be upgraded;otherwise, the   
        transaction must wait 
5.9.2 Guaranteeing Serializability by Two-Phase Locking 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

 
A transaction is said to follow the two-phase locking protocol if all locking operations 
(read_lock, write_lock) precede the first unlock operation in the transaction 
 
Such a transaction can be divided into two phases:  
 
Expanding or growing (first) phase, during which new locks on  items can be   
acquired but none can be released 
 
Shrinking (second) phase, during which existing locks can be released but no 
new locks can be acquired 
 
If lock conversion is allowed, then upgrading of locks (from read-locked to write-locked) 
must be done during the expanding phase, and downgrading of locks (from write-locked 
to read-locked) must be done in the shrinking phase. 
 
Transactions T1 and T2 in Figure 22.3(a) do not follow the two-phase locking protocol 
because the write_lock(X) operation follows the unlock(Y) operation in T1, and similarly 
the write_lock(Y) operation follows the unlock(X) operation in T2. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 21.3 Transactions that do not 
obey two-phase locking (a) Two 
transactions T1 and T2 (b) Results of 
possible serial schedules of T1 and T2 
(c) A nonserializable schedule S that 
uses locks 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

 
 
If we enforce two-phase locking, the transactions can be rewritten as T
T
in Figure 22.4.  
 
Now, the schedule shown in Figure 22.3(c) is not permitted for T1_ and T2_ (with their 
modified order of locking and unlocking operations) under the rules of locking because T1_ 
will issue its write_lock(X) before it unlocks item Y; consequently, when T2_ issues its 
read_lock(X), it is forced to wait until T1_ releases the lock by issuing an unlock (X) in the 
schedule. 
 
 
 
If every transaction in a schedule follows the two-phase locking protocol, schedule 
guaranteed to be serializable  
 
Two-phase locking may limit the amount of concurrency that can occur in a schedule  
 
Some serializable schedules will be prohibited by two-phase locking protocol  
 
5.10 Variations of Two-Phase Locking 
 
 
Basic 2PL  
 
Technique described previously 
 
Conservative (static) 2PL  
 
Requires a transaction to lock all the items it accesses before the transaction 
begins execution by predeclaring read-set and write-set  
 
Its Deadlock-free protocol  
 
 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

 
Strict 2PL  
 
guarantees strict schedules 
 
Transaction does not release exclusive locks until after it commits or aborts  
 
no other transaction can read or write an item that is written by T unless T has 
committed, leading to a strict schedule for recoverability 
 
Strict 2PL is not deadlock-free 
 
 
Rigorous 2PL  
 
guarantees strict schedules 
 
Transaction does not release any locks until after it commits or aborts  
 
easier to implement than strict 2PL
 
5.11 Dealing with Deadlock and Starvation 
 Deadlock occurs when each transaction T in a set of two or more transactions is 
waiting for some item that is locked by some other transaction T in the set.  
 Hence, each transaction in the set is in a waiting queue, waiting for one of the other 
transactions in the set to release the lock on an item. 
  But because the other transaction is also waiting, it will never release the lock. 
 A simple example is shown in Figure 22.5(a), where the two transactions T
T
T
X, which is 
locked by T
T
Y, which is locked by T
neither T
T
X and Y 
 
 
 
Figure 22.5 Illustrating the deadlock problem (a) A partial schedule of T
T
state of deadlock (b) A wait-for graph for the partial schedule in (a) 
 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

Deadlock prevention protocols  
 
 
One way to prevent deadlock is to use a deadlock prevention protocol 
 
 One deadlock prevention protocol, which is used in conservative two-phase locking, 
requires that every transaction lock all the items it needs in advance. If any of the items 
cannot be obtained, none of the items are locked. Rather, the transaction waits and then 
tries again to lock all the items it needs. 
 
A second protocol, which also limits concurrency, involves ordering all the items in the 
database and making sure that a transaction that needs several items will lock them 
according to that order. This requires that the programmer (or the system) is aware of 
the chosen order of the items 
 
Both approaches impractical  
 
Some of these techniques use the concept of transaction timestamp TS(T), which is a 
unique identifier assigned to each transaction 
 
The timestamps are typically based on the order in which transactions are started; hence, if 
transaction T1 starts before transaction T2, then TS(T1) < TS(T2). 
 
The older transaction (which starts first) has the smaller timestamp value. 
 
Protocols based on a timestamp  
  Wait-die  
  Wound-wait  
 
Suppose that transaction Ti tries to lock an item X but is not able to because X is locked 
by some other transaction Tj with a conflicting lock. The rules followed by these 
schemes are: 
Wait-die. If TS(Ti) < TS(Tj), then (Ti older than Tj) Ti is allowed to wait; otherwise (Ti 
younger than Tj) abort Ti (Ti dies) and restart it later with the same timestamp. 
Wound-wait. If TS(Ti) < TS(Tj), then (Ti older than Tj) abort Tj (Ti wounds Tj) and 
restart it later with the same timestamp; otherwise (Ti younger than Tj) Ti is allowed to 
wait. 
 
In wait-die, an older transaction is allowed to wait for a younger transaction, whereas a 
younger transaction requesting an item held by an older transaction is aborted and 
restarted. 
 
 The wound-wait approach does the opposite: A younger transaction is allowed to wait 
for an older one, whereas an older transaction requesting an item held by a younger 
transaction preempts the younger transaction by aborting it. 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

 
 Both schemes end up aborting the younger of the two transactions (the transaction that 
started later) that may be involved in a deadlock, assuming that this will waste less 
processing. 
 
It can be shown that these two techniques are deadlock-free, since in wait-die, 
transactions only wait for younger transactions so no cycle is created. 
 
Similarly, in wound-wait, transactions only wait for older transactions so no cycle is 
created. 
 
Another group of protocols that prevent deadlock do not require timestamps. These 
include the  
 no waiting (NW) and  
 cautious waiting (CW) algorithms
 
No waiting algorithm, 
 if a transaction is unable to obtain a lock, it is immediately aborted and then 
restarted after a certain time delay without checking whether a deadlock will 
actually occur or not. 
  no transaction ever waits, so no deadlock will occur 
 this scheme can cause transactions to abort and restart needlessly 
 
 cautious waiting  
  try to reduce the number of needless aborts/restarts 
  Suppose that transaction Ti tries to lock an item X but is not able to do so because 
X is locked by some other transaction Tj with a conflicting lock.  
 The cautious waiting rules are as follows:
 
If Tj is not blocked (not waiting for some other locked item), then Ti is 
blocked and allowed to wait; otherwise abort Ti. 
 It can be shown that cautious waiting is deadlock-free, because no transaction will 
ever wait for another blocked transaction. 
 
5.12 Deadlock Detection. 
 
A second, more practical approach to dealing with deadlock is deadlock detection, 
where the system checks if a state of deadlock actually exists. 
 
This solution is attractive if we know there will be little interference among the 
transactions
that is, if different transactions will rarely access the same items at the 
same time. 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

 
 This can happen if the transactions are short and each transaction locks only a few 
items, or if the transaction load is light. 
 
 On the other hand, if transactions are long and each transaction uses many items, or if 
the transaction load is quite heavy, it may be advantageous to use a deadlock 
prevention scheme. 
 
A simple way to detect a state of deadlock is for the system to construct and maintain a 
wait-for graph.  
 
One node is created in the wait-for graph for each transaction that is currently executing. 
 
Whenever a transaction Ti is waiting to lock an item X that is currently locked by a 
transaction Tj, a directed edge (Ti 
Tj) is created in the wait-for graph. 
 
 When Tj releases the lock(s) on the items that Ti was waiting for, the directed edge is 
dropped from the wait-for graph.We have a state of deadlock if and only if the wait-for 
graph has a cycle.  
 
One problem with this approach is the matter of determining when the system should 
check for a deadlock.  
 
One possibility is to check for a cycle every time an edge is added to the wait-for graph, 
but this may cause excessive overhead.  
 
Criteria such as the number of currently executing transactions or the period of time 
several transactions have been waiting to lock items may be used instead to check for a 
cycle. Figure 22.5(b) shows the wait-for graph for the (partial) schedule shown in Figure 
22.5(a). 
 
If the system is in a state of deadlock, some of the transactions causing the deadlock 
must be aborted. 
 
 Choosing which transactions to abort is known as victim selection. 
 
The algorithm for victim selection should generally avoid selecting transactions that have 
been running for a long time and that have performed many updates, and it should try 
instead to select transactions that have not made many changes (younger transactions). 
 Timeouts 
  Another simple scheme to deal with deadlock is the use of timeouts. 
 This method is practical because of its low overhead and simplicity.  
 
In this method, if a transaction waits for a period longer than a system-defined 
timeout period, the system assumes that the transaction may be deadlocked and 
aborts it
regardless of whether a deadlock actually exists or not. 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

 
Starvation. 
 
Another problem that may occur when we use locking is starvation, which occurs 
when a transaction cannot proceed for an indefinite period of time while other 
transactions in the system continue normally. 
 
This may occur if the waiting scheme for locked items is unfair, giving priority to 
some transactions over others  
 
One solution for starvation is to have a fair waiting scheme, such as using a first- 
      come-first-served queue; transactions are enabled to lock an item in the order in  
       which they originally requested the lock.  
 
Another scheme allows some transactions to have priority over others but 
increases the priority of a transaction the longer it waits, until it eventually gets the 
highest priority and proceeds.  
 
Starvation can also occur because of victim selection if the algorithm selects the 
same transaction as victim repeatedly, thus causing it to abort and never finish 
execution. 
 
 The algorithm can use higher priorities for transactions that have been aborted 
multiple times to avoid this problem. 
 
5.13  Concurrency Control Based on Timestamp Ordering 
 
guarantees serializability using transaction timestamps to order transaction execution 
for an equivalent serial schedule 
  5.13.1 Timestamps 
 
timestamp is a unique identifier created by the DBMS to identify a transaction. 
 
Typically, timestamp values are assigned in the order in which the transactions are 
submitted to the system, so a timestamp can be thought of as the transaction start 
time.  
 
We will refer to the timestamp of transaction T as TS(T). 
 
Concurrency control techniques based on timestamp ordering do not use 
locks;hence, deadlocks cannot occur.
 
Timestamps can be generated in several ways.  
 
One possibility is to use a counter that is incremented each time its value is 
assigned to a transaction. The transaction timestamps are numbered 1, 2, 3, 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

... in this scheme. A computer counter has a finite maximum value, so the 
system must periodically reset the counter to zero when no transactions are 
executing for some short period of time.  
 
Another way to implement timestamps is to use the current date/time value of 
the system clock and ensure that no two timestamp values are generated 
during the same tick of the clock.
      5.13.2 The Timestamp Ordering Algorithm
 
The idea for this scheme is to order the transactions based on their 
timestamps.  
 
A schedule in which the transactions participate is then serializable, and the 
only equivalent serial schedule permitted has the transactions in order of their  
timestamp values. This is called timestamp ordering (TO). 
 The algorithm must ensure that, for each item accessed by conflicting      
Operations in the schedule, the order in which the item is accessed does not 
violate the timestamp order. 
 To do this, the algorithm associates with each database item X two timestamp 
(TS) values: 
1. read_TS(X). The read timestamp of item X is the largest  timestamp 
among all the timestamps of transactions that have successfully 
read item X
that is, read_TS(X) = TS(T), where T is the youngest 
transaction that has read X successfully. 
2. write_TS(X). The write timestamp of item X is the largest of all the 
timestamps of transactions that have successfully written item X
that is, write_TS(X) = TS(T), where T is the youngest transaction that 
has written X successfully. 
Basic Timestamp Ordering (TO). 
 
 Whenever some transaction T tries to issue a read_item(X) or a write_item(X) operation, 
the basic TO algorithm compares the timestamp of T with read_TS(X) and write_TS(X) to 
ensure that the timestamp order of transaction execution is not violated.  
 
If this order is violated, then transaction T is aborted and resubmitted to the system as a 
new transaction with a new timestamp.  
 
If T is aborted and rolled back, any transaction T1 that may have used a value written by T 
must also be rolled back.  
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

 
Similarly, any transaction T2 that may have used a value written by T1 must also be rolled 
back, and so on. This effect is known as cascading rollback and is one of the problems 
associated with basic TO, since the schedules produced are not guaranteed to be 
recoverable.  
 
An additional protocol must be enforced to ensure that the schedules are recoverable, 
cascadeless, or strict. 
 
The basic TO algorithm :  
 
The concurrency control algorithm must check whether conflicting operations violate 
the timestamp ordering in the following two cases: 
1. Whenever a transaction T issues a write_item(X) operation, the following is 
checked: 
a. If read_TS(X) > TS(T) or if write_TS(X) > TS(T), then abort and roll back T and 
reject the operation. This should be done because some younger transaction 
with a timestamp greater than TS(T)
and hence after T in the timestamp 
ordering
has already read or written the value of item X before T had a chance 
to write X, thus violating the timestamp ordering. 
b.If the condition in part (a) does not occur, then execute the write_item(X) 
operation of T and set write_TS(X) to TS(T). 
2. Whenever a transaction T issues a read_item(X) operation, the following is checked: 
a. If write_TS(X) > TS(T), then abort and roll back T and reject the operation. This 
should be done because some younger transaction with timestamp greater than 
TS(T)
and hence after T in the timestamp ordering
has already written the 
value of item X before T had a chance to read X. 
b. If write_TS(X
T), then execute the read_item(X) operation of T and set 
read_TS(X) to the larger of TS(T) and the current read_TS(X). 
 Whenever the basic TO algorithm detects two conflicting operations that occur in 
the incorrect order, it rejects the later of the two operations by aborting the 
transaction that issued it. The schedules produced by basic TO are hence 
guaranteed to be conflict serializable 
Strict Timestamp Ordering (TO) 
 
A variation of basic TO called strict TO ensures that the schedules are both strict 
(for easy recoverability) and (conflict) serializable. 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

 
 In this variation, a transaction T that issues a read_item(X) or write_item(X) such 
that TS(T) > write_TS(X) has its read or write operation delayed until the transaction 
T that wrote the value of X (hence TS(T ) = write_TS(X)) has  committed or aborted. 
 
To implement this algorithm, it is necessary to simulate the locking of an item X that   
       has been written by transaction T until T is either committed or aborted. This  
        algorithm does not cause deadlock, since T waits for T only if TS(T) > TS(T_). 
 
 
 
A modification of the basic TO algorithm, known as 
, does not 
enforce conflict serializability, but it rejects fewer write operations by modifying the 
checks for the write_item(X) operation as follows:
1. If read_TS(X) > TS(T), then abort and roll back T and reject the operation. 
2. If write_TS(X) > TS(T), then do not execute the write operation but continue  
    processing. This is because some transaction with timestamp greater than TS(T)
 
    and hence after T in the timestamp ordering
has already written the value of X.  
    Thus, we must ignore the write_item(X) operation of T because it is already outdated  
    and obsolete. Notice that any conflict arising from this situation would be detected by  
    case (1). 
If neither the condition in part (1) nor the condition in part (2) occurs, then execute  
the write_item(X) operation of T and set write_TS(X) to TS(T). 
 
5.14 Multiversion Concurrency Control Techniques 
 Other protocols for concurrency control keep the old values of a data item when the 
item is updated. These are known as multiversion concurrency control, because 
several versions (values) of an item are maintained 
  When a transaction requires access to an item, an appropriate version is chosen to 
maintain the serializability of the currently executing schedule, if possible.  
 The idea is that some read operations that would be rejected in other techniques can 
still be accepted by reading an older version of the item to maintain serializability.When 
a transaction writes an item, it writes a new version and the old version(s) of the item 
are retained 
 An obvious drawback of multiversion techniques is that more storage is needed to maintain 
multiple versions of the database items 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

5.14.1 Multiversion Technique Based on Timestamp Ordering 
 
In this method, several versions X1, X2, ..., Xk of each data item X are maintained. 
 
For each version, the value of version Xi and the following two timestamps are kept: 
1.  read_TS(Xi). The read timestamp of Xi is the largest of all the timestamps of 
                 transactions that have successfully read version Xi. 
2. write_TS(Xi). The write timestamp of Xi is the timestamp of the transaction 
                that wrote the value of version Xi.
 
Whenever a transaction T is allowed to execute a write_item(X) operation, a new   
      version Xk+1 of item X is created, with both the write_TS(Xk+1) and the   
      read_TS(Xk+1) set to TS(T) 
 Correspondingly, when a transaction T is allowed to read the value of version Xi, the  
     value of read_TS(Xi) is set to the larger of the current read_TS(Xi) and TS(T). 
 
To ensure serializability, the following rules are used: 
1. If transaction T issues a write_item(X) operation, and version i of X has the   
highest write_TS(Xi) of all versions of X that is also less than or equal to TS(T), 
and read_TS(Xi) > TS(T), then abort and roll back transaction T; otherwise, 
create a new version Xj of X with read_TS(Xj) = write_TS(Xj) = TS(T). 
2. If transaction T issues a read_item(X) operation, find the version i of X that has 
the highest write_TS(Xi) of all versions of X that is also less than or equal to 
TS(T); then return the value of Xi to transaction T, and set the value of read_TS( 
Xi) to the larger of TS(T) and the current read_TS(Xi). 
 
5.14.2 Multiversion Two-Phase Locking Using Certify Locks 
 
In this multiple-mode locking scheme, there are three locking modes for an item: 
                  read, write, and certify 
 
Hence, the state of LOCK(X) for an item X can be one of read-locked, writelocked, 
                  certify-locked, or unlocked  
 
We can describe the relationship between read and write locks in the standard 
scheme by means of the lock compatibility table shown in Figure 22.6(a) 
 
An entry of Yes means that if a transaction T holds the type of lock specified in the 
column header on item X and if transaction T_ requests the type of lock specified in 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

the row header on the same item X, then T_ can obtain the lock because the locking 
modes are compatible 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 22.6: Lock compatibility tables. (a) A compatibility table for read/write locking scheme. 
(b) A compatibility table for read/write/certify locking scheme. 
 
On the other hand, an entry of No in the table indicates that the locks are not compatible, 
so T must wait until T releases the lock 
 
The idea behind multiversion 2PL is to allow other transactions T
X 
while a single transaction T holds a write lock on X
 
This is accomplished by allowing two versions for each item X; one version must always 
have been written by some committed transaction
 
 The second version X is created when a transaction T acquires a write lock on the item 
 
5.15 Validation (Optimistic) Concurrency Control Techniques 
 
In optimistic concurrency control techniques, also known as validation or 
certification techniques, no checking is done while the transaction is executing 
 
In this scheme, updates in the transaction are not applied directly to the database items 
until the transaction reaches its end 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

 
 During transaction execution, all updates are applied to local copies of the data items 
that are kept for the transaction 
 
 At the end of transaction execution, a validation phase checks whether any of the 
. 
 
There are three phases for this concurrency control protocol: 
1. Read phase. A transaction can read values of committed data items from the  
database. However, updates are applied only to local copies (versions) of the data 
items kept in the transaction workspace.
2. Validation phase. Checking is performed to ensure that serializability will not be 
violated if the transaction updates are applied to the database. 
3. Write phase. If the validation phase is successful, the transaction updates are 
applied to the database; otherwise, the updates are discarded and the transaction is 
restarted. 
 
The idea behind optimistic concurrency control is to do all the checks at once; hence, 
transaction execution proceeds with a minimum of overhead until the validation phase is 
reached 
 
The techniques are called optimistic because they assume that little interference will 
occur and hence that there is no need to do checking during transaction execution. 
 
The validation phase for Ti checks that, for each such transaction Tj that is either  
      committed or is in its validation phase, one of the following conditions holds: 
1. Transaction Tj completes its write phase before Ti starts its read phase. 
2. Ti starts its write phase after Tj completes its write phase, and the read_set 
                  of Ti has no items in common with the write_set of Tj. 
3. Both the read_set and write_set of Ti have no items in common with the 
write_set of Tj, and Tj completes its read phase before Ti completes its read 
                  phase. 
5.16 Granularity of Data Items and Multiple Granularity Locking 
 
All concurrency control techniques assume that the database is formed of a number 
           of named data items. A database item could be chosen to be one of the following: 
A database record 
A field value of a database record 
A disk block 
A whole file 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

The whole database 
 
The granularity can affect the performance of concurrency control and recovery 
5.16.1 Granularity Level Considerations for Locking
 
The size of data items is often called the data item granularity.  
 
Fine granularity refers to small item sizes, whereas coarse granularity refers to large 
item sizes 
 
The larger the data item size is, the lower the degree of concurrency permitted.  
 
For example, if the data item size is a disk block, a transaction T that needs to lock a 
record B must lock the whole disk block X that contains B because a lock is associated 
with the whole data item (block). Now, if another transaction S wants to lock a different 
record C that happens to reside in the same block X in a conflicting lock mode, it is 
forced to wait. If the data item size was a single record, transaction S would be able to 
proceed, because it would be locking a different data item (record). 
 
The smaller the data item size is, the more the number of items in the database. 
Because every item is associated with a lock, the system will have a larger number of 
active locks to be handled by the lock manager. More lock and unlock operations will be 
performed, causing a higher overhead
 
The best item size depends on the types of transactions involved. 
 
If a typical transaction accesses a small number of records, it is advantageous to have 
the data item granularity be one record
 
 On the other hand, if a transaction typically accesses many records in the same file, it 
may be better to have block or file granularity so that the transaction will consider all 
those records as one (or a few) data items
 
5.16.2 Multiple Granularity Level Locking
 
Since the best granularity size depends on the given transaction, it seems appropriate 
that a database system should support multiple levels of granularity, where the 
granularity level can be different for various mixes of transactions 
 
Figure 22.7 shows a simple granularity hierarchy with a database containing two files, 
each file containing several disk pages, and each page containing several records.  
 
This can be used to illustrate a multiple granularity level 2PL protocol, where a lock 
can be requested at any level 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

 
Figure 22.7 A granularity hierarchy for illustrating multiple granularity level locking  
 
 
To make multiple granularity level locking practical, additional types of locks, called 
intention locks, are needed 
 
The idea behind intention locks is for a transaction to indicate, along the path from the root 
to the desired node, what type of lock (shared or exclusive) it will require from one of the 
 
 
There are three types of intention locks: 
1. Intention-shared (IS) indicates that one or more shared locks will be requested on some   
    descendant node(s). 
2. Intention-exclusive (IX) indicates that one or more exclusive locks will be requested on   
     some descendant node(s). 
3. Shared-intention-exclusive (SIX) indicates that the current node is locked in shared     
    mode but that one or more exclusive locks will be requested on some descendant   
    node(s). 
 
The compatibility table of the three intention locks, and the shared and exclusive locks, is 
shown in Figure 22.8. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 22.8: Lock compatibility matrix for multiple granularity locking. 
 
 
The multiple granularity locking (MGL) protocol consists of the following rules: 
1. The lock compatibility (based on Figure 22.8) must be adhered to. 
2. The root of the tree must be locked first, in any mode. 
3. A node N can be locked by a transaction T in S or IS mode only if the parent 
           node N is already locked by transaction T in either IS or IX mode. 
4. A node N can be locked by a transaction T in X, IX, or SIX mode only if the 
           parent of node N is already locked by transaction T in either IX or SIX mode. 
5. A transaction T can lock a node only if it has not unlocked any node (to 
            enforce the 2PL protocol). 
6. A transaction T can unlock a node, N, only if none of the children of node N 
            are currently locked by T. 
 
The multiple granularity level protocol is especially suited when processing a mix of 
transactions that include 
   (1) short transactions that access only a few items (records or fields) and 
   (2) long transactions that access entire files. 
 
 
https://vtucode.in
[BCS403]

884 
24.1 Introduction to NOSQL Systems
24.1.1 Emergence of NOSQL Systems
Many companies and organizations are faced with applications that store vast 
amounts of data. Consider a free e-mail application, such as Google Mail or Yahoo 
Mail or other similar service—this application can have millions of users, and each 
user can have thousands of e-mail messages. There is a need for a storage system 
that can manage all these e-mails; a structured relational SQL system may not be 
appropriate because (1) SQL systems offer too many services (powerful query lan-
guage, concurrency control, etc.), which this application may not need; and (2) a 
structured data model such the traditional relational model may be too restrictive. 
Although newer relational systems do have more complex object-relational model-
ing options (see Chapter 12), they still require schemas, which are not required by 
many of the NOSQL systems.
As another example, consider an application such as Facebook, with millions of 
users who submit posts, many with images and videos; then these posts must be 
displayed on pages of other users using the social media relationships among the 
users. User profiles, user relationships, and posts must all be stored in a huge collec-
tion of data stores, and the appropriate posts must be made available to the sets of 
users that have signed up to see these posts. Some of the data for this type of appli-
cation is not suitable for a traditional relational system and typically needs multiple 
types of databases and data storage systems.
Some of the organizations that were faced with these data management and storage 
applications decided to develop their own systems:
 
■Google developed a proprietary NOSQL system known as BigTable, which is 
used in many of Google’s applications that require vast amounts of data stor-
age, such as Gmail, Google Maps, and Web site indexing. Apache Hbase is an 
open source NOSQL system based on similar concepts. Google’s innovation 
led to the category of NOSQL systems known as column-based or wide 
column stores; they are also sometimes referred to as column family stores.
 
■Amazon developed a NOSQL system called DynamoDB that is available 
through Amazon’s cloud services. This innovation led to the category known 
as key-value data stores or sometimes key-tuple or key-object data stores.
 
■Facebook developed a NOSQL system called Cassandra, which is now open 
source and known as Apache Cassandra. This NOSQL system uses concepts 
from both key-value stores and column-based systems.
 
■Other software companies started developing their own solutions and making 
them available to users who need these capabilities—for example, MongoDB 
and CouchDB, which are classified as document-based NOSQL systems or 
document stores.
 
■Another category of NOSQL systems is the graph-based NOSQL systems, 
or graph databases; these include Neo4J and GraphBase, among others.
NOSQL Databases and Big Data Storage Systems

 
24.1 Introduction to NOSQL Systems 
885
 
■Some NOSQL systems, such as OrientDB, combine concepts from many of 
the categories discussed above.
 
■In addition to the newer types of NOSQL systems listed above, it is also pos-
sible to classify database systems based on the object model (see Chapter 12) 
or on the native XML model (see Chapter 13) as NOSQL systems, although 
they may not have the high-performance and replication characteristics of 
the other types of NOSQL systems.
These are just a few examples of NOSQL systems that have been developed. There 
are many systems, and listing all of them is beyond the scope of our presentation.
24.1.2 Characteristics of NOSQL Systems
We now discuss the characteristics of many NOSQL systems, and how these sys-
tems differ from traditional SQL systems. We divide the characteristics into two 
categories—those related to distributed databases and distributed systems, and 
those related to data models and query languages.
NOSQL characteristics related to distributed databases and distributed 
systems. NOSQL systems emphasize high availability, so replicating the data is 
inherent in many of these systems. Scalability is another important characteristic, 
because many of the applications that use NOSQL systems tend to have data that 
keeps growing in volume. High performance is another required characteristic, 
whereas serializable consistency may not be as important for some of the NOSQL 
applications. We discuss some of these characteristics next.
  1. Scalability: As we discussed in Section 23.1.4, there are two kinds of scal-
ability in distributed systems: horizontal and vertical. In NOSQL systems, 
horizontal scalability is generally used, where the distributed system is 
expanded by adding more nodes for data storage and processing as the vol-
ume of data grows. Vertical scalability, on the other hand, refers to expand-
ing the storage and computing power of existing nodes. In NOSQL systems, 
horizontal scalability is employed while the system is operational, so tech-
niques for distributing the existing data among new nodes without inter-
rupting system operation are necessary. We will discuss some of these 
techniques in Sections 24.3 through  24.6 when we discuss specific systems.
  2. Availability, Replication and Eventual Consistency: Many applications 
that use NOSQL systems require continuous system availability. To accom-
plish this, data is replicated over two or more nodes in a transparent man-
ner, so that if one node fails, the data is still available on other nodes. 
Replication improves data availability and can also improve read perfor-
mance, because read requests can often be serviced from any of the repli-
cated data nodes. However, write performance becomes more cumbersome 
because an update must be applied to every copy of the replicated data items; 
this can slow down write performance if serializable consistency is required 
(see Section 23.3). Many NOSQL applications do not require serializable 

886 
Chapter 24 NOSQL Databases and Big Data Storage Systems
consistency, so more relaxed forms of consistency known as eventual 
consistency are used. We discuss this in more detail in Section 24.2.
  3. Replication Models: Two major replication models are used in NOSQL sys-
tems: master-slave and master-master replication. Master-slave replication 
requires one copy to be the master copy; all write operations must be applied 
to the master copy and then propagated to the slave copies, usually using 
eventual consistency (the slave copies will eventually be the same as the mas-
ter copy). For read, the master-slave paradigm can be configured in various 
ways. One configuration requires all reads to also be at the master copy, so 
this would be similar to the primary site or primary copy methods of distrib-
uted concurrency control (see Section 23.3.1), with similar advantages and 
disadvantages. Another configuration would allow reads at the slave copies 
but would not guarantee that the values are the latest writes, since writes to 
the slave nodes can be done after they are applied to the master copy. The 
master-master replication allows reads and writes at any of the replicas but 
may not guarantee that reads at nodes that store different copies see the 
same values. Different users may write the same data item concurrently at 
different nodes of the system, so the values of the item will be temporarily 
inconsistent. A reconciliation method to resolve conflicting write operations 
of the same data item at different nodes must be implemented as part of the 
master-master replication scheme.
  4. Sharding of Files: In many NOSQL applications, files (or collections of data 
objects) can have many millions of records (or documents or objects), and 
these records can be accessed concurrently by thousands of users. So it is not 
practical to store the whole file in one node. Sharding (also known as 
 horizontal partitioning ; see Section 23.2) of the file records is often 
employed in NOSQL systems. This serves to distribute the load of accessing 
the file records to multiple nodes. The combination of sharding the file 
records and replicating the shards works in tandem to improve load 
 balancing as well as data availability. We will discuss some of the sharding 
techniques in Sections 24.3 through  24.6 when we discuss specific systems.
  5. High-Performance Data Access: In many NOSQL applications, it is neces-
sary to find individual records or objects (data items) from among the mil-
lions of data records or objects in a file. To achieve this, most systems use 
one of two techniques: hashing or range partitioning on object keys. The 
majority of accesses to an object will be by providing the key value rather 
than by using complex query conditions. The object key is similar to the 
concept of object id (see Section 12.1). In hashing, a hash function h(K) is 
applied to the key K, and the location of the object with key K is determined 
by the value of h(K). In range partitioning, the location is determined via a 
range of key values; for example, location i would hold the objects whose key 
values K are in the range Kimin ≤ K ≤ Kimax. In applications that require 
range queries, where multiple objects within a range of key values are 
retrieved, range partitioned is preferred. Other indexes can also be used to 
locate objects based on attribute conditions different from the key K. We 

 
24.1 Introduction to NOSQL Systems 
887
will discuss some of the hashing, partitioning, and indexing techniques in 
Sections 24.3 through  24.6 when we discuss specific systems.
NOSQL characteristics related to data models and query languages. 
NOSQL systems emphasize performance and flexibility over modeling power and 
complex querying. We discuss some of these characteristics next.
  1. Not Requiring a Schema: The flexibility of not requiring a schema is 
achieved in many NOSQL systems by allowing semi-structured, self-
describing data (see Section 13.1). The users can specify a partial schema in 
some systems to improve storage efficiency, but it is not required to have a 
schema in most of the NOSQL systems. As there may not be a schema to 
specify constraints, any constraints on the data would have to be pro-
grammed in the application programs that access the data items. There are 
various languages for describing semistructured data, such as JSON (JavaScript 
Object Notation) and XML (Extensible Markup Language; see Chapter 13). 
JSON is used in several NOSQL systems, but other methods for describing 
semi-structured data can also be used. We will discuss JSON in Section 24.3 
when we present document-based NOSQL systems.
  2. Less Powerful Query Languages: Many applications that use NOSQL sys-
tems may not require a powerful query language such as SQL, because 
search (read) queries in these systems often locate single objects in a single 
file based on their object keys. NOSQL systems typically provide a set of 
functions and operations as a programming API (application programming 
interface), so reading and writing the data objects is accomplished by calling 
the appropriate operations by the programmer. In many cases, the opera-
tions are called CRUD operations, for Create, Read, Update, and Delete. In 
other cases, they are known as SCRUD because of an added Search (or Find) 
operation. Some NOSQL systems also provide a high-level query language, 
but it may not have the full power of SQL; only a subset of SQL querying 
capabilities would be provided. In particular, many NOSQL systems do not 
provide join operations as part of the query language itself; the joins need to 
be implemented in the application programs.
  3. Versioning: Some NOSQL systems provide storage of multiple versions of 
the data items, with the timestamps of when the data version was created. 
We will discuss this aspect in Section 24.5 when we present column-based 
NOSQL systems.
In the next section, we give an overview of the various categories of NOSQL 
systems.
24.1.3 Categories of NOSQL Systems
NOSQL systems have been characterized into four major categories, with some 
additional categories that encompass other types of systems. The most common 
categorization lists the following four major categories:

888 
Chapter 24 NOSQL Databases and Big Data Storage Systems
  1. Document-based NOSQL systems: These systems store data in the form of 
documents using well-known formats, such as JSON (JavaScript Object 
Notation). Documents are accessible via their document id, but can also be 
accessed rapidly using other indexes.
  2. NOSQL key-value stores: These systems have a simple data model based 
on fast access by the key to the value associated with the key; the value can 
be a record or an object or a document or even have a more complex data 
structure.
  3. Column-based or wide column NOSQL systems: These systems partition a 
table by column into column families (a form of vertical partitioning; see 
Section 23.2), where each column family is stored in its own files. They also 
allow versioning of data values.
  4. Graph-based NOSQL systems: Data is represented as graphs, and related 
nodes can be found by traversing the edges using path expressions.
Additional categories can be added as follows to include some systems that are not 
easily categorized into the above four categories, as well as some other types of sys-
tems that have been available even before the term NOSQL became widely used.
  5. Hybrid NOSQL systems: These systems have characteristics from two or 
more of the above four categories.
  6. Object databases: These systems were discussed in Chapter 12.
  7. XML databases: We discussed XML in Chapter 13.
Even keyword-based search engines store large amounts of data with fast search 
access, so the stored data can be considered as large NOSQL big data stores.
The rest of this chapter is organized as follows. In each of Sections 24.3 through 
24.6, we will discuss one of the four main categories of NOSQL systems, and elabo-
rate further on which characteristics each category focuses on. Before that, in Sec-
tion 24.2, we discuss in more detail the concept of eventual consistency, and we 
discuss the associated CAP theorem.
24.2 The CAP Theorem
When we discussed concurrency control in distributed databases in Section 23.3, 
we assumed that the distributed database system (DDBS) is required to enforce the 
ACID properties (atomicity, consistency, isolation, durability) of transactions that 
are running concurrently (see Section 20.3). In a system with data replication, con-
currency control becomes more complex because there can be multiple copies of 
each data item. So if an update is applied to one copy of an item, it must be applied 
to all other copies in a consistent manner. The possibility exists that one copy of an 
item X is updated by a transaction T1 whereas another copy is updated by a transac-
tion T2, so two inconsistent copies of the same item exist at two different nodes in 
the distributed system. If two other transactions T3 and T4 want to read X, each may 
read a different copy of item X.

 
24.2 The CAP Theorem 
889
We saw in Section 23.3 that there are distributed concurrency control methods that 
do not allow this inconsistency among copies of the same data item, thus enforcing 
serializability and hence the isolation property in the presence of replication. How-
ever, these techniques often come with high overhead, which would defeat the pur-
pose of creating multiple copies to improve performance and availability in 
distributed database systems such as NOSQL. In the field of distributed systems, 
there are various levels of consistency among replicated data items, from weak con-
sistency to strong consistency. Enforcing serializability is considered the strongest 
form of consistency, but it has high overhead so it can reduce performance of read 
and write operations and hence adversely affect system performance.
The CAP theorem, which was originally introduced as the CAP principle, can be 
used to explain some of the competing requirements in a distributed system with 
replication. The three letters in CAP refer to three desirable properties of distributed 
systems with replicated data: consistency (among replicated copies), availability (of 
the system for read and write operations) and partition tolerance (in the face of the 
nodes in the system being partitioned by a network fault). Availability means that 
each read or write request for a data item will either be processed successfully or will 
receive a message that the operation cannot be completed. Partition tolerance means 
that the system can continue operating if the network connecting the nodes has a 
fault that results in two or more partitions, where the nodes in each partition can 
only communicate among each other. Consistency means that the nodes will have 
the same copies of a replicated data item visible for various transactions.
It is important to note here that the use of the word consistency in CAP and its use 
in ACID do not refer to the same identical concept. In CAP, the term consistency 
refers to the consistency of the values in different copies of the same data item in a 
replicated distributed system. In ACID, it refers to the fact that a transaction will 
not violate the integrity constraints specified on the database schema. However, if 
we consider that the consistency of replicated copies is a specified constraint, then 
the two uses of the term consistency would be related.
The CAP theorem states that it is not possible to guarantee all three of the desirable 
properties—consistency, availability, and partition tolerance—at the same time in a 
distributed system with data replication. If this is the case, then the distributed sys-
tem designer would have to choose two properties out of the three to guarantee. It 
is generally assumed that in many traditional (SQL) applications, guaranteeing 
consistency through the ACID properties is important. On the other hand, in a 
NOSQL distributed data store, a weaker consistency level is often acceptable, and 
guaranteeing the other two properties (availability, partition tolerance) is impor-
tant. Hence, weaker consistency levels are often used in NOSQL system instead of 
guaranteeing serializability. In particular, a form of consistency known as eventual 
consistency is often adopted in NOSQL systems. In Sections 24.3 through  24.6, we 
will discuss some of the consistency models used in specific NOSQL systems.
The next four sections of this chapter discuss the characteristics of the four main cat-
egories of NOSQL systems. We discuss document-based NOSQL systems in Sec-
tion 24.3, and we use MongoDB as a representative system. In Section 24.4, we discuss 

890 
Chapter 24 NOSQL Databases and Big Data Storage Systems
NOSQL systems known as key-value stores. In Section 24.5, we give an overview of 
column-based NOSQL systems, with a discussion of Hbase as a representative sys-
tem. Finally, we introduce graph-based NOSQL systems in Section 24.6.
24.3  Document-Based NOSQL Systems  
and MongoDB
Document-based or document-oriented NOSQL systems typically store data as 
collections of similar documents. These types of systems are also sometimes known 
as document stores. The individual documents somewhat resemble complex objects 
(see Section 12.3) or XML documents (see Chapter 13), but a major difference 
between document-based systems versus object and object-relational systems and 
XML is that there is no requirement to specify a schema—rather, the documents are 
specified as self-describing data (see Section 13.1). Although the documents in a 
collection should be similar, they can have different data elements (attributes), and 
new documents can have new data elements that do not exist in any of the current 
documents in the collection. The system basically extracts the data element names 
from the self-describing documents in the collection, and the user can request that 
the system create indexes on some of the data elements. Documents can be speci-
fied in various formats, such as XML (see Chapter 13). A popular language to spec-
ify documents in NOSQL systems is JSON (JavaScript Object Notation).
There are many document-based NOSQL systems, including MongoDB and 
CouchDB, among many others. We will give an overview of MongoDB in this sec-
tion. It is important to note that different systems can use different models, lan-
guages, and implementation methods, but giving a complete survey of all 
document-based NOSQL systems is beyond the scope of our presentation.
24.3.1 MongoDB Data Model
MongoDB documents are stored in BSON (Binary JSON) format, which is a varia-
tion of JSON with some additional data types and is more efficient for storage than 
JSON. Individual documents are stored in a collection. We will use a simple exam-
ple based on our COMPANY database that we used throughout this book. The 
operation createCollection is used to create each collection. For example, the fol-
lowing command can be used to create a collection called project to hold PROJECT 
objects from the COMPANY database (see Figures 5.5 and 5.6):
db.createCollection(“project”, { capped : true, size : 1310720, max : 500 } )
The first parameter “project” is the name of the collection, which is followed by an 
optional document that specifies collection options. In our example, the collection 
is capped; this means it has upper limits on its storage space (size) and number of 
documents (max). The capping parameters help the system choose the storage 
options for each collection. There are other collection options, but we will not dis-
cuss them here.

 
24.3 Document-Based NOSQL Systems and MongoDB  
891
For our example, we will create another document collection called worker to 
hold information about the EMPLOYEEs who work on each project; for 
example:
db.createCollection(“worker”, { capped : true, size : 5242880, max : 2000 } ) )
Each document in a collection has a unique ObjectId field, called _id, which is 
automatically indexed in the collection unless the user explicitly requests no index 
for the _id field. The value of ObjectId can be specified by the user, or it can be 
system-generated if the user does not specify an _id field for a particular document. 
System-generated ObjectIds have a specific format, which combines the timestamp 
when the object is created (4 bytes, in an internal MongoDB format), the node id 
(3 bytes), the process id (2 bytes), and a counter (3 bytes) into a 16-byte Id value. 
User-generated ObjectsIds can have any value specified by the user as long as it 
uniquely identifies the document and so these Ids are similar to primary keys in 
relational systems.
A collection does not have a schema. The structure of the data fields in documents 
is chosen based on how documents will be accessed and used, and the user can 
choose a normalized design (similar to normalized relational tuples) or a denor-
malized design (similar to XML documents or complex objects). Interdocument 
references can be specified by storing in one document the ObjectId or ObjectIds of 
other related documents. Figure 24.1(a) shows a simplified MongoDB document 
showing some of the data from Figure 5.6 from the COMPANY database example 
that is used throughout the book. In our example, the _id values are user-defined, 
and the documents whose _id starts with P (for project) will be stored in the “project” 
collection, whereas those whose _id starts with W (for worker) will be stored in the 
“worker” collection.
In Figure 24.1(a), the workers information is embedded in the project document; so 
there is no need for the “worker” collection. This is known as the denormalized pat-
tern, which is similar to creating a complex object (see Chapter 12) or an XML 
document (see Chapter 13). A list of values that is enclosed in square brackets [ … ] 
within a document represents a field whose value is an array.
Another option is to use the design in Figure 24.1(b), where worker references are 
embedded in the project document, but the worker documents themselves are 
stored in a separate “worker” collection. A third option in Figure 24.1(c) would 
use a normalized design, similar to First Normal Form relations (see Sec-
tion 14.3.4). The choice of which design option to use depends on how the data 
will be accessed.
It is important to note that the simple design in Figure 24.1(c) is not the general nor-
malized design for a many-to-many relationship, such as the one between employees 
and projects; rather, we would need three collections for “project”, “employee”, and 
“works_on”, as we discussed in detail in Section 9.1. Many of the design tradeoffs 
that were discussed in Chapters 9 and 14 (for first normal form relations and for ER-
to-relational mapping options), and Chapters 12 and 13 (for complex objects and 
XML) are applicable for choosing the appropriate design for document structures 

892 
Chapter 24 NOSQL Databases and Big Data Storage Systems
(a) project document with an array of embedded workers:
 
{
 
 
_id:  
 
 
“P1”,
 
 
Pname:  
 
“ProductX”,
 
 
Plocation: 
 
“Bellaire”,
 
 
Workers: [ 
 
 
 
 
 
{ Ename: “John Smith”,
 
 
 
 
 
    Hours: 32.5
 
 
 
 
 
},
 
 
 
 
 
{ Ename: “Joyce English”,
 
 
 
 
 
    Hours: 20.0
 
 
 
 
 
}
 
 
 
 
]
 
);
(b) project document with an embedded array of worker ids:
 
{
 
 
_id:  
 
 
“P1”,
 
 
Pname:  
 
“ProductX”,
 
 
Plocation: 
 
“Bellaire”,
 
 
WorkerIds: 
 
[ “W1”, “W2” ]
 
}
 
 
{ _id: 
 
 
“W1”,
 
 
Ename:  
 
“John Smith”,
 
 
Hours: 
 
 
32.5
 
}
 
 
{ _id: 
 
 
“W2”,
 
 
Ename:  
 
“Joyce English”,
 
 
Hours: 
 
 
20.0
 
}
(c)  normalized project and worker documents (not a fully normalized design  
for M:N relationships):
 
{
 
 
_id:  
 
 
“P1”,
 
 
Pname:  
 
“ProductX”,
 
 
Plocation: 
 
“Bellaire”
 
}
 
{ 
_id:  
 
 
“W1”,
 
 
Ename:  
 
“John Smith”,
 
 
ProjectId: 
 
“P1”,
 
 
Hours: 
 
 
32.5
 
}
Figure 24.1 
Example of simple 
documents in  
MongoDB.  
(a) Denormalized  
document design  
with embedded  
subdocuments.  
(b) Embedded array of 
document references. 
(c) Normalized  
documents.

 
24.3 Document-Based NOSQL Systems and MongoDB  
893
and document collections, so we will not repeat the discussions here. In the design 
in Figure 24.1(c), an EMPLOYEE who works on several projects would be repre-
sented by multiple worker documents with different _id values; each document 
would represent the employee as worker for a particular project. This is similar to 
the design decisions for XML schema design (see Section 13.6). However, it is again 
important to note that the typical document-based system does not have a schema, 
so the design rules would have to be followed whenever individual documents are 
inserted into a collection.
24.3.2 MongoDB CRUD Operations
MongoDb has several CRUD operations, where CRUD stands for (create, read, 
update, delete). Documents can be created and inserted into their collections using 
the insert operation, whose format is:
db.<collection_name>.insert(<document(s)>)
The parameters of the insert operation can include either a single document or an 
array of documents, as shown in Figure 24.1(d). The delete operation is called 
remove, and the format is:
db.<collection_name>.remove(<condition>)
The documents to be removed from the collection are specified by a Boolean con-
dition on some of the fields in the collection documents. There is also an update 
operation, which has a condition to select certain documents, and a $set clause to 
specify the update. It is also possible to use the update operation to replace an 
existing document with another one but keep the same ObjectId.
For read queries, the main command is called find, and the format is:
db.<collection_name>.find(<condition>)
General Boolean conditions can be specified as <condition>, and the documents in 
the collection that return true are selected for the query result. For a full discussion 
of the MongoDb CRUD operations, see the MongoDB online documentation in the 
chapter references.
 
{ 
_id:  
 
 
“W2”,
 
 
Ename:  
 
“Joyce English”,
 
 
ProjectId: 
 
“P1”,
 
 
Hours: 
 
 
20.0
 
}
(d) inserting the documents in (c) into their collections “project” and “worker”:
 
db.project.insert( { _id: “P1”, Pname: “ProductX”, Plocation: “Bellaire” } )
 
db.worker.insert( [ { _id: “W1”, Ename: “John Smith”, ProjectId: “P1”, Hours: 32.5 },
 
 
 
 
 
 { _id: “W2”, Ename: “Joyce English”, ProjectId: “P1”,  
 Hours: 20.0 } ] )
Figure 24.1 
(continued)
Example of simple  
documents in
MongoDB. (d) Inserting 
the documents in 
 Figure 24.1(c) into 
their collections.

894 
Chapter 24 NOSQL Databases and Big Data Storage Systems
24.3.3 MongoDB Distributed Systems Characteristics
Most MongoDB updates are atomic if they refer to a single document, but MongoDB 
also provides a pattern for specifying transactions on multiple documents. Since 
MongoDB is a distributed system, the two-phase commit method is used to ensure 
atomicity and consistency of multidocument transactions. We discussed the atomi-
city and consistency properties of transactions in Section 20.3, and the two-phase 
commit protocol in Section 22.6.
Replication in MongoDB. The concept of replica set is used in MongoDB to create 
multiple copies of the same data set on different nodes in the distributed system, and 
it uses a variation of the master-slave approach for replication. For example, suppose 
that we want to replicate a particular document collection C. A replica set will have 
one primary copy of the collection C stored in one node N1, and at least one 
 secondary copy (replica) of C stored at another node N2. Additional copies can be 
stored in nodes N3, N4, etc., as needed, but the cost of storage and update (write) 
increases with the number of replicas. The total number of participants in a replica set 
must be at least three, so if only one secondary copy is needed, a participant in the 
 replica set known as an arbiter must run on the third node N3. The arbiter does not 
hold a replica of the collection but participates in elections to choose a new primary if 
the node storing the current primary copy fails. If the total number of members in a rep-
lica set is n (one primary plus i secondaries, for a total of n = i + 1), then n must be an odd 
number; if it is not, an arbiter is added to ensure the election process works correctly if 
the primary fails. We discussed elections in distributed systems in Section 23.3.1.
In MongoDB replication, all write operations must be applied to the primary copy 
and then propagated to the secondaries. For read operations, the user can choose 
the particular read preference for their application. The default read preference 
processes all reads at the primary copy, so all read and write operations are per-
formed at the primary node. In this case, secondary copies are mainly to make sure 
that the system continues operation if the primary fails, and MongoDB can ensure 
that every read request gets the latest document value. To increase read perfor-
mance, it is possible to set the read preference so that read requests can be processed 
at any replica (primary or secondary); however, a read at a secondary is not guaran-
teed to get the latest version of a document because there can be a delay in propa-
gating writes from the primary to the secondaries.
Sharding in MongoDB. When a collection holds a very large number of docu-
ments or requires a large storage space, storing all the documents in one node can 
lead to performance problems, particularly if there are many user operations 
accessing the documents concurrently using various CRUD operations. Sharding 
of the documents in the collection—also known as horizontal partitioning—
divides the documents into disjoint partitions known as shards. This allows the 
system to add more nodes as needed by a process known as horizontal scaling of 
the distributed system (see Section 23.1.4), and to store the shards of the collection 
on different nodes to achieve load balancing. Each node will process only those 
operations pertaining to the documents in the shard stored at that node. Also, each 

 
24.4 NOSQL Key-Value Stores 
895
shard will contain fewer documents than if the entire collection were stored at one 
node, thus further improving performance.
There are two ways to partition a collection into shards in MongoDB—range 
 partitioning and hash partitioning. Both require that the user specify a particular 
document field to be used as the basis for partitioning the documents into shards. 
The partitioning field—known as the shard key in MongoDB—must have two 
characteristics: it must exist in every document in the collection, and it must have an 
index. The ObjectId can be used, but any other field possessing these two character-
istics can also be used as the basis for sharding. The values of the shard key are 
divided into chunks either through range partitioning or hash partitioning, and the 
documents are partitioned based on the chunks of shard key values.
Range partitioning creates the chunks by specifying a range of key values; for example, 
if the shard key values ranged from one to ten million, it is possible to create ten 
ranges—1 to 1,000,000; 1,000,001 to 2,000,000; … ; 9,000,001 to 10,000,000—and 
each chunk would contain the key values in one range. Hash partitioning applies a 
hash function h(K) to each shard key K, and the partitioning of keys into chunks is 
based on the hash values (we discussed hashing and its advantages and disadvantages 
in Section 16.8). In general, if range queries are commonly applied to a collection (for 
example, retrieving all documents whose shard key value is between 200 and 400), 
then range partitioning is preferred because each range query will typically be submit-
ted to a single node that contains all the required documents in one shard. If most 
searches retrieve one document at a time, hash partitioning may be preferable because 
it randomizes the distribution of shard key values into chunks.
When sharding is used, MongoDB queries are submitted to a module called the query 
router, which keeps track of which nodes contain which shards based on the particu-
lar partitioning method used on the shard keys. The query (CRUD operation) will be 
routed to the nodes that contain the shards that hold the documents that the query is 
requesting. If the system cannot determine which shards hold the required docu-
ments, the query will be submitted to all the nodes that hold shards of the collection. 
Sharding and replication are used together; sharding focuses on improving perfor-
mance via load balancing and horizontal scalability, whereas replication focuses on 
ensuring system availability when certain nodes fail in the distributed system.
There are many additional details about the distributed system architecture and com-
ponents of MongoDB, but a full discussion is outside the scope of our presentation. 
MongoDB also provides many other services in areas such as system administration, 
indexing, security, and data aggregation, but we will not discuss these features here. 
Full documentation of MongoDB is available online (see the bibliographic notes).
24.4 NOSQL Key-Value Stores
Key-value stores focus on high performance, availability, and scalability by storing 
data in a distributed storage system. The data model used in key-value stores is rela-
tively simple, and in many of these systems, there is no query language but rather a 

896 
Chapter 24 NOSQL Databases and Big Data Storage Systems
set of operations that can be used by the application programmers. The key is a 
unique identifier associated with a data item and is used to locate this data item 
rapidly. The value is the data item itself, and it can have very different formats for 
different key-value storage systems. In some cases, the value is just a string of bytes 
or an array of bytes, and the application using the key-value store has to interpret 
the structure of the data value. In other cases, some standard formatted data is 
allowed; for example, structured data rows (tuples) similar to relational data, or 
semistructured data using JSON or some other self-describing data format. Differ-
ent key-value stores can thus store unstructured, semistructured, or structured data 
items (see Section 13.1). The main characteristic of key-value stores is the fact that 
every value (data item) must be associated with a unique key, and that retrieving the 
value by supplying the key must be very fast.
There are many systems that fall under the key-value store label, so rather than pro-
vide a lot of details on one particular system, we will give a brief introductory over-
view for some of these systems and their characteristics.
24.4.1 DynamoDB Overview
The DynamoDB system is an Amazon product and is available as part of Amazon’s 
AWS/SDK platforms (Amazon Web Services/Software Development Kit). It can be 
used as part of Amazon’s cloud computing services, for the data storage component.
DynamoDB data model. The basic data model in DynamoDB uses the concepts 
of tables, items, and attributes. A table in DynamoDB does not have a schema; it 
holds a collection of self-describing items. Each item will consist of a number of 
(attribute, value) pairs, and attribute values can be single-valued or multivalued. So 
basically, a table will hold a collection of items, and each item is a self-describing 
record (or object). DynamoDB also allows the user to specify the items in JSON for-
mat, and the system will convert them to the internal storage format of DynamoDB.
When a table is created, it is required to specify a table name and a primary key; 
the primary key will be used to rapidly locate the items in the table. Thus, the pri-
mary key is the key and the item is the value for the DynamoDB key-value store. 
The primary key attribute must exist in every item in the table. The primary key can 
be one of the following two types:
 
■A single attribute. The DynamoDB system will use this attribute to build a 
hash index on the items in the table. This is called a hash type primary key. 
The items are not ordered in storage on the value of the hash attribute.
 
■A pair of attributes. This is called a hash and range type primary key. The 
primary key will be a pair of attributes (A, B): attribute A will be used for hash-
ing, and because there will be multiple items with the same value of A, the B 
values will be used for ordering the records with the same A value. A table 
with this type of key can have additional secondary indexes defined on its 
attributes. For example, if we want to store multiple versions of some type of 
items in a table, we could use ItemID as hash and Date or Timestamp (when 
the version was created) as range in a hash and range type primary key.

 
24.4 NOSQL Key-Value Stores 
897
DynamoDB Distributed Characteristics. Because DynamoDB is proprietary, in 
the next subsection we will discuss the mechanisms used for replication, sharding, 
and other distributed system concepts in an open source key-value system called 
Voldemort. Voldemort is based on many of the techniques proposed for DynamoDB.
24.4.2 Voldemort Key-Value Distributed Data Store
Voldemort is an open source system available through Apache 2.0 open source licens-
ing rules. It is based on Amazon’s DynamoDB. The focus is on high performance and 
horizontal scalability, as well as on providing replication for high availability and 
sharding for improving latency (response time) of read and write requests. All three 
of those features—replication, sharding, and horizontal scalability—are realized 
through a technique to distribute the key-value pairs among the nodes of a distrib-
uted cluster; this distribution is known as consistent hashing. Voldemort has been 
used by LinkedIn for data storage. Some of the features of Voldemort are as follows:
 
■Simple basic operations. A collection of (key, value) pairs is kept in a 
Voldemort store. In our discussion, we will assume the store is called s. The 
basic interface for data storage and retrieval is very simple and includes 
three operations: get, put, and delete. The operation s.put(k, v) inserts an 
item as a key-value pair with key k and value v. The operation s.delete(k) 
deletes the item whose key is k from the store, and the operation v = s.get(k) 
retrieves the value v associated with key k. The application can use these 
basic operations to build its own requirements. At the basic storage level, 
both keys and values are arrays of bytes (strings).
 
■High-level formatted data values. The values v in the (k, v) items can be 
specified in JSON (JavaScript Object Notation), and the system will convert 
between JSON and the internal storage format. Other data object formats can 
also be specified if the application provides the conversion (also known as 
serialization) between the user format and the storage format as a Serializer 
class. The Serializer class must be provided by the user and will include oper-
ations to convert the user format into a string of bytes for storage as a value, 
and to convert back a string (array of bytes) retrieved via s.get(k) into the user 
format. Voldemort has some built-in serializers for formats other than JSON.
 
■Consistent hashing for distributing (key, value) pairs. A variation of the 
data distribution algorithm known as consistent hashing is used in Volde-
mort for data distribution among the nodes in the distributed cluster of 
nodes. A hash function h(k) is applied to the key k of each (k, v) pair, and 
h(k) determines where the item will be stored. The method assumes that 
h(k) is an integer value, usually in the range 0 to Hmax = 2n−1, where n is 
chosen based on the desired range for the hash values. This method is best 
visualized by considering the range of all possible integer hash values 0 to 
Hmax to be evenly distributed on a circle (or ring). The nodes in the distrib-
uted system are then also located on the same ring; usually each node will 
have several locations on the ring (see Figure 24.2). The positioning of the 
points on the ring that represent the nodes is done in a psuedorandom manner. 

898 
Chapter 24 NOSQL Databases and Big Data Storage Systems
An item (k, v) will be stored on the node whose position in the ring follows 
the position of h(k) on the ring in a clockwise direction. In Figure 24.2(a), we 
assume there are three nodes in the distributed cluster labeled A, B, and C, 
where node C has a bigger capacity than nodes A and B. In a typical system, 
there will be many more nodes. On the circle, two instances each of A and B 
are placed, and three instances of C (because of its higher capacity), in a 
pseudorandom manner to cover the circle. Figure 24.2(a) indicates which 
(k, v) items are placed in which nodes based on the h(k) values.
C
C
A
B
C
A
B
Range 3
Range 1
Range 2
Range 3
Range 3
Range 2
Range 1
C
C
A
D
B
C
A
D
B
Range 3
Range 1
Range 4
Range 3
Range 4
Range 3
(reduced)
Range 2
(reduced)
Range 2
Range 1
Figure 24.2 
Example of consistent 
hashing. (a) Ring 
 having three nodes A, 
B, and C, with C having 
greater capacity. The 
h(K) values that map to 
the circle points in 
range 1 have their (k, v) 
items stored in node A, 
range 2 in node B, 
range 3 in node C. 
(b) Adding a node D to 
the ring. Items in 
range 4 are moved to 
the node D from node 
B (range 2 is reduced) 
and node C (range 3 is 
reduced).

 
 
899
 
■The h(k) values that fall in the parts of the circle marked as range 1 in Fig-
ure 24.2(a) will have their (k, v) items stored in node A because that is the node 
whose label follows h(k) on the ring in a clockwise direction; those in range 2 
are stored in node B; and those in range 3 are stored in node C. This scheme 
allows horizontal scalability because when a new node is added to the distrib-
uted system, it can be added in one or more locations on the ring depending 
on the node capacity. Only a limited percentage of the (k, v) items will be reas-
signed to the new node from the existing nodes based on the consistent hash-
ing placement algorithm. Also, those items assigned to the new node may not 
all come from only one of the existing nodes because the new node can have 
multiple locations on the ring. For example, if a node D is added and it has two 
placements on the ring as shown in Figure 24.2(b), then some of the items 
from nodes B and C would be moved to node D. The items whose keys hash to 
range 4 on the circle (see Figure 24.2(b)) would be migrated to node D. This 
scheme also allows replication by placing the number of specified replicas of 
an item on successive nodes on the ring in a clockwise direction. The sharding 
is built into the method, and different items in the store (file) are located on 
different nodes in the distributed cluster, which means the items are horizon-
tally partitioned (sharded) among the nodes in the distributed system. When 
a node fails, its load of data items can be distributed to the other existing nodes 
whose labels follow the labels of the failed node in the ring. And nodes with 
higher capacity can have more locations on the ring, as illustrated by node C 
in Figure 24.2(a), and thus store more items than smaller-capacity nodes.
 
■Consistency and versioning. Voldemort uses a method similar to the one 
developed for DynamoDB for consistency in the presence of replicas. Basi-
cally, concurrent write operations are allowed by different processes so there 
could exist two or more different values associated with the same key at dif-
ferent nodes when items are replicated. Consistency is achieved when the 
item is read by using a technique known as versioning and read repair. Con-
current writes are allowed, but each write is associated with a vector clock 
value. When a read occurs, it is possible that different versions of the same 
value (associated with the same key) are read from different nodes. If the 
system can reconcile to a single final value, it will pass that value to the read; 
otherwise, more than one version can be passed back to the application, 
which will reconcile the various versions into one version based on the 
application semantics and give this reconciled value back to the nodes.
24.4.3 Examples of Other Key-Value Stores
In this section, we briefly review three other key-value stores. It is important to note 
that there are many systems that can be classified in this category, and we can only 
mention a few of these systems.
Oracle key-value store. Oracle has one of the well-known SQL relational data-
base systems, and Oracle also offers a system based on the key-value store concept; 
this system is called the Oracle NoSQL Database.
24.4 NOSQL Key-Value Stores

900 
Chapter 24 NOSQL Databases and Big Data Storage Systems
Redis key-value cache and store.  Redis differs from the other systems dis-
cussed here because it caches its data in main memory to further improve perfor-
mance. It offers master-slave replication and high availability, and it also offers 
persistence by backing up the cache to disk.
Apache Cassandra.  Cassandra is a NOSQL system that is not easily categorized 
into one category; it is sometimes listed in the column-based NOSQL category (see 
Section 24.5) or in the key-value category. If offers features from several NOSQL 
categories and is used by Facebook as well as many other customers.
24.5  Column-Based or Wide Column  
NOSQL Systems
Another category of NOSQL systems is known as column-based or wide column 
systems. The Google distributed storage system for big data, known as BigTable, is 
a well-known example of this class of NOSQL systems, and it is used in many 
Google applications that require large amounts of data storage, such as Gmail. Big-
Table uses the Google File System (GFS) for data storage and distribution. An 
open source system known as Apache Hbase is somewhat similar to Google Big-
Table, but it typically uses HDFS (Hadoop Distributed File System) for data stor-
age. HDFS is used in many cloud computing applications, as we shall discuss in 
Chapter 25. Hbase can also use Amazon’s Simple Storage System (known as S3) 
for data storage. Another well-known example of column-based NOSQL systems is 
Cassandra, which we discussed briefly in Section 24.4.3 because it can also be char-
acterized as a key-value store. We will focus on Hbase in this section as an example 
of this category of NOSQL systems.
BigTable (and Hbase) is sometimes described as a sparse multidimensional distrib-
uted persistent sorted map, where the word map means a collection of (key, value) 
pairs (the key is mapped to the value). One of the main differences that distinguish 
column-based systems from key-value stores (see Section 24.4) is the nature of the 
key. In column-based systems such as Hbase, the key is multidimensional and so 
has several components: typically, a combination of table name, row key, column, 
and timestamp. As we shall see, the column is typically composed of two compo-
nents: column family and column qualifier. We discuss these concepts in more 
detail next as they are realized in Apache Hbase.
24.5.1 Hbase Data Model and Versioning
Hbase data model. The data model in Hbase organizes data using the concepts 
of namespaces, tables, column families, column qualifiers, columns, rows, and data 
cells. A column is identified by a combination of (column family:column qualifier). 
Data is stored in a self-describing form by associating columns with data values, 
where data values are strings. Hbase also stores multiple versions of a data item, 
with a timestamp associated with each version, so versions and timestamps are also 

 
24.5 Column-Based or Wide Column NOSQL Systems  
901
part of the Hbase data model (this is similar to the concept of attribute versioning in 
temporal databases, which we shall discuss in Section 26.2). As with other NOSQL 
systems, unique keys are associated with stored data items for fast access, but the 
keys identify cells in the storage system. Because the focus is on high performance 
when storing huge amounts of data, the data model includes some storage-related 
concepts. We discuss the Hbase data modeling concepts and define the terminol-
ogy next. It is important to note that the use of the words table, row, and column is 
not identical to their use in relational databases, but the uses are related.
 
■Tables and Rows. Data in Hbase is stored in tables, and each table has a 
table name. Data in a table is stored as self-describing rows. Each row has a 
unique row key, and row keys are strings that must have the property that 
they can be lexicographically ordered, so characters that do not have a lexi-
cographic order in the character set cannot be used as part of a row key.
 
■Column Families, Column Qualifiers, and Columns. A table is associated 
with one or more column families. Each column family will have a name, 
and the column families associated with a table must be specified when the 
table is created and cannot be changed later. Figure 24.3(a) shows how a table 
may be created; the table name is followed by the names of the column fami-
lies associated with the table. When the data is loaded into a table, each col-
umn family can be associated with many column qualifiers, but the column 
qualifiers are not specified as part of creating a table. So the column qualifiers 
make the model a self-describing data model because the qualifiers can be 
dynamically specified as new rows are created and inserted into the table. A 
column is specified by a combination of ColumnFamily:ColumnQualifier. 
Basically, column families are a way of grouping together related columns 
(attributes in relational terminology) for storage purposes, except that the 
column qualifier names are not specified during table creation. Rather, they 
are specified when the data is created and stored in rows, so the data is self-
describing since any column qualifier name can be used in a new row of data 
(see Figure 24.3(b)). However, it is important that the application program-
mers know which column qualifiers belong to each column family, even 
though they have the flexibility to create new column qualifiers on the fly 
when new data rows are created. The concept of column family is somewhat 
similar to vertical partitioning (see Section 23.2), because columns (attri-
butes) that are accessed together because they belong to the same column 
family are stored in the same files. Each column family of a table is stored in 
its own files using the HDFS file system.
 
■Versions and Timestamps. Hbase can keep several versions of a data item, 
along with the timestamp associated with each version. The timestamp is a 
long integer number that represents the system time when the version was 
created, so newer versions have larger timestamp values. Hbase uses mid-
night ‘January 1, 1970 UTC’ as timestamp value zero, and uses a long integer 
that measures the number of milliseconds since that time as the system 
timestamp value (this is similar to the value returned by the Java utility 
java.util.Date.getTime() and is also used in MongoDB). It is also possible for 

902 
Chapter 24 NOSQL Databases and Big Data Storage Systems
the user to define the timestamp value explicitly in a Date format rather than 
using the system-generated timestamp.
 
■Cells. A cell holds a basic data item in Hbase. The key (address) of a cell is 
specified by a combination of (table, rowid, columnfamily, columnqualifier, 
timestamp). If timestamp is left out, the latest version of the item is retrieved 
unless a default number of versions is specified, say the latest three versions. 
The default number of versions to be retrieved, as well as the default number 
of versions that the system needs to keep, are parameters that can be speci-
fied during table creation.
 
■Namespaces. A namespace is a collection of tables. A namespace basically 
specifies a collection of one or more tables that are typically used together by 
user applications, and it corresponds to a database that contains a collection 
of tables in relational terminology.
(a) creating a table:
 
create ‘EMPLOYEE’, ‘Name’, ‘Address’, ‘Details’
(b) inserting some row data in the EMPLOYEE table:
 
put ‘EMPLOYEE’, ‘row1’, ‘Name:Fname’, ‘John’
 
put ‘EMPLOYEE’, ‘row1’, ‘Name:Lname’, ‘Smith’
 
put ‘EMPLOYEE’, ‘row1’, ‘Name:Nickname’, ‘Johnny’
 
put ‘EMPLOYEE’, ‘row1’, ‘Details:Job’, ‘Engineer’
 
put ‘EMPLOYEE’, ‘row1’, ‘Details:Review’, ‘Good’
 
put ‘EMPLOYEE’, ‘row2’, ‘Name:Fname’, ‘Alicia’
 
put ‘EMPLOYEE’, ‘row2’, ‘Name:Lname’, ‘Zelaya’
 
put ‘EMPLOYEE’, ‘row2’, ‘Name:MName’, ‘Jennifer’
 
put ‘EMPLOYEE’, ‘row2’, ‘Details:Job’, ‘DBA’
 
put ‘EMPLOYEE’, ‘row2’, ‘Details:Supervisor’, ‘James Borg’
 
put ‘EMPLOYEE’, ‘row3’, ‘Name:Fname’, ‘James’
 
put ‘EMPLOYEE’, ‘row3’, ‘Name:Minit’, ‘E’
 
put ‘EMPLOYEE’, ‘row3’, ‘Name:Lname’, ‘Borg’
 
put ‘EMPLOYEE’, ‘row3’, ‘Name:Suffix’, ‘Jr.’
 
put ‘EMPLOYEE’, ‘row3’, ‘Details:Job’, ‘CEO’
 
put ‘EMPLOYEE’, ‘row3’, ‘Details:Salary’, ‘1,000,000’
(c) Some Hbase basic CRUD operations:
 
Creating a table: create <tablename>, <column family>, <column family>, …
 
Inserting Data: put <tablename>, <rowid>, <column family>:<column qualifier>, <value>
 
Reading Data (all data in a table): scan <tablename>
 
Retrieve Data (one item): get <tablename>,<rowid>
Figure 24.3 
Examples in Hbase. (a) Creating a table called EMPLOYEE with three column families: Name, Address, and Details. 
(b) Inserting some in the EMPLOYEE table; different rows can have different self-describing column qualifiers 
(Fname, Lname, Nickname, Mname, Minit, Suffix, … for column family Name; Job, Review, Supervisor, Salary  
for column family Details). (c) Some CRUD operations of Hbase.

 
24.6 NOSQL Graph Databases and Neo4j 
903
24.5.2 Hbase CRUD Operations
Hbase has low-level CRUD (create, read, update, delete) operations, as in many of 
the NOSQL systems. The formats of some of the basic CRUD operations in Hbase 
are shown in Figure 24.3(c).
Hbase only provides low-level CRUD operations. It is the responsibility of the 
application programs to implement more complex operations, such as joins 
between rows in different tables. The create operation creates a new table and spec-
ifies one or more column families associated with that table, but it does not specify 
the column qualifiers, as we discussed earlier. The put operation is used for insert-
ing new data or new versions of existing data items. The get operation is for retriev-
ing the data associated with a single row in a table, and the scan operation retrieves 
all the rows.
24.5.3 Hbase Storage and Distributed System Concepts
Each Hbase table is divided into a number of regions, where each region will hold a 
range of the row keys in the table; this is why the row keys must be lexicographically 
ordered. Each region will have a number of stores, where each column family is 
assigned to one store within the region. Regions are assigned to region servers 
(storage nodes) for storage. A master server (master node) is responsible for moni-
toring the region servers and for splitting a table into regions and assigning regions 
to region servers.
Hbase uses the Apache Zookeeper open source system for services related to man-
aging the naming, distribution, and synchronization of the Hbase data on the dis-
tributed Hbase server nodes, as well as for coordination and replication services. 
Hbase also uses Apache HDFS (Hadoop Distributed File System) for distributed 
file services. So Hbase is built on top of both HDFS and Zookeeper. Zookeeper can 
itself have several replicas on several nodes for availability, and it keeps the data it 
needs in main memory to speed access to the master servers and region servers.
We will not cover the many additional details about the distributed system architecture 
and components of Hbase; a full discussion is outside the scope of our presentation. Full 
documentation of Hbase is available online (see the bibliographic notes).
24.6 NOSQL Graph Databases and Neo4j
Another category of NOSQL systems is known as graph databases or graph-
oriented NOSQL systems. The data is represented as a graph, which is a collection 
of vertices (nodes) and edges. Both nodes and edges can be labeled to indicate the 
types of entities and relationships they represent, and it is generally possible to 
store data associated with both individual nodes and individual edges. Many sys-
tems can be categorized as graph databases. We will focus our discussion on one 
particular system, Neo4j, which is used in many applications. Neo4j is an open 
source system, and it is implemented in Java. We will discuss the Neo4j data model 

904 
Chapter 24 NOSQL Databases and Big Data Storage Systems
in Section 24.6.1, and give an introduction to the Neo4j querying capabilities in 
Section 24.6.2. Section 24.6.3 gives an overview of the distributed systems and 
some other characteristics of Neo4j.
24.6.1 Neo4j Data Model
The data model in Neo4j organizes data using the concepts of nodes and relation-
ships. Both nodes and relationships can have properties, which store the data items 
associated with nodes and relationships. Nodes can have labels; the nodes that have 
the same label are grouped into a collection that identifies a subset of the nodes in 
the database graph for querying purposes. A node can have zero, one, or several 
labels. Relationships are directed; each relationship has a start node and end node as 
well as a relationship type, which serves a similar role to a node label by identifying 
similar relationships that have the same relationship type. Properties can be speci-
fied via a map pattern, which is made of one or more “name : value” pairs enclosed 
in curly brackets; for example {Lname : ‘Smith’, Fname : ‘John’, Minit : ‘B’}.
In conventional graph theory, nodes and relationships are generally called vertices 
and edges. The Neo4j graph data model somewhat resembles how data is repre-
sented in the ER and EER models (see Chapters 3 and  4) , but with some notable 
differences. Comparing the Neo4j graph model with ER/EER concepts, nodes cor-
respond to entities, node labels correspond to entity types and subclasses, relation-
ships correspond to relationship instances, relationship types correspond to 
relationship types, and properties correspond to attributes. One notable difference 
is that a relationship is directed in Neo4j, but is not in ER/EER. Another is that a 
node may have no label in Neo4j, which is not allowed in ER/EER because every 
entity must belong to an entity type. A third crucial difference is that the graph 
model of Neo4j is used as a basis for an actual high-performance distributed data-
base system whereas the ER/EER model is mainly used for database design.
Figure 24.4(a) shows how a few nodes can be created in Neo4j. There are various 
ways in which nodes and relationships can be created; for example, by calling appro-
priate Neo4j operations from various Neo4j APIs. We will just show the high-level 
syntax for creating nodes and relationships; to do so, we will use the Neo4j CREATE 
command, which is part of the high-level declarative query language Cypher. Neo4j 
has many options and variations for creating nodes and relationships using various 
scripting interfaces, but a full discussion is outside the scope of our presentation.
 
■Labels and properties. When a node is created, the node label can be speci-
fied. It is also possible to create nodes without any labels. In Figure 24.4(a), the 
node labels are EMPLOYEE, DEPARTMENT, PROJECT, and LOCATION, 
and the created nodes correspond to some of the data from the COMPANY 
database in Figure 5.6 with a few modifications; for example, we use EmpId 
instead of SSN, and we only include a small subset of the data for illustration 
purposes. Properties are enclosed in curly brackets { … }. It is possible that 
some nodes have multiple labels; for example the same node can be labeled as 
PERSON and EMPLOYEE and MANAGER by listing all the labels separated 
by the colon symbol as follows: PERSON:EMPLOYEE:MANAGER. Having 
multiple labels is similar to an entity belonging to an entity type (PERSON) 

 
24.6 NOSQL Graph Databases and Neo4j 
905
plus some subclasses of PERSON (namely EMPLOYEE and MANAGER) in 
the EER model (see Chapter 4) but can also be used for other purposes.
 
■Relationships and relationship types. Figure 24.4(b) shows a few example 
relationships in Neo4j based on the COMPANY database in Figure 5.6. 
The → specifies the direction of the relationship, but the relationship can be 
traversed in either direction. The relationship types (labels) in Figure 24.4(b) 
are WorksFor, Manager, LocatedIn, and WorksOn; only relationships with 
the relationship type WorksOn have properties (Hours) in Figure 24.4(b).
 
■Paths. A path specifies a traversal of part of the graph. It is typically used as 
part of a query to specify a pattern, where the query will retrieve from the 
graph data that matches the pattern. A path is typically specified by a start 
node, followed by one or more relationships, leading to one or more end 
nodes that satisfy the pattern. It is somewhat similar to the concepts of path 
expressions that we discussed in Chapters 12 and  13 in the context of query 
languages for object databases (OQL) and XML (XPath and XQuery).
 
■Optional Schema. A schema is optional in Neo4j. Graphs can be created 
and used without a schema, but in Neo4j version 2.0, a few schema-related 
functions were added. The main features related to schema creation involve 
creating indexes and constraints based on the labels and properties. For 
example, it is possible to create the equivalent of a key constraint on a prop-
erty of a label, so all nodes in the collection of nodes associated with the label 
must have unique values for that property.
 
■Indexing and node identifiers. When a node is created, the Neo4j system 
creates an internal unique system-defined identifier for each node. To 
retrieve individual nodes using other properties of the nodes efficiently, the 
user can create indexes for the collection of nodes that have a particular 
label. Typically, one or more of the properties of the nodes in that collection 
can be indexed. For example, Empid can be used to index nodes with the 
EMPLOYEE label, Dno to index the nodes with the DEPARTMENT label, 
and Pno to index the nodes with the PROJECT label.
24.6.2 The Cypher Query Language of Neo4j
Neo4j has a high-level query language, Cypher. There are declarative commands for 
creating nodes and relationships (see Figures 24.4(a) and (b)), as well as for finding 
nodes and relationships based on specifying patterns. Deletion and modification of 
data is also possible in Cypher. We introduced the CREATE command in the previous 
section, so we will now give a brief overview of some of the other features of Cypher.
A Cypher query is made up of clauses. When a query has several clauses, the result 
from one clause can be the input to the next clause in the query. We will give a fla-
vor of the language by discussing some of the clauses using examples. Our presenta-
tion is not meant to be a detailed presentation on Cypher, just an introduction to 
some of the languages features. Figure 24.4(c) summarizes some of the main clauses 
that can be part of a Cyber query. The Cyber language can specify complex queries 
and updates on a graph database. We will give a few of examples to illustrate simple 
Cyber queries in Figure 24.4(d).

906 
Chapter 24 NOSQL Databases and Big Data Storage Systems
(a) creating some nodes for the COMPANY data (from Figure 5.6):
 
CREATE (e1: EMPLOYEE, {Empid: ‘1’, Lname: ‘Smith’, Fname: ‘John’, Minit: ‘B’})
 
CREATE (e2: EMPLOYEE, {Empid: ‘2’, Lname: ‘Wong’, Fname: ‘Franklin’})
 
CREATE (e3: EMPLOYEE, {Empid: ‘3’, Lname: ‘Zelaya’, Fname: ‘Alicia’})
 
CREATE (e4: EMPLOYEE, {Empid: ‘4’, Lname: ‘Wallace’, Fname: ‘Jennifer’, Minit: ‘S’})
 
…
 
CREATE (d1: DEPARTMENT, {Dno: ‘5’, Dname: ‘Research’})
 
CREATE (d2: DEPARTMENT, {Dno: ‘4’, Dname: ‘Administration’})
 
…
 
CREATE (p1: PROJECT, {Pno: ‘1’, Pname: ‘ProductX’})
 
CREATE (p2: PROJECT, {Pno: ‘2’, Pname: ‘ProductY’})
 
CREATE (p3: PROJECT, {Pno: ‘10’, Pname: ‘Computerization’})
 
CREATE (p4: PROJECT, {Pno: ‘20’, Pname: ‘Reorganization’})
 
…
 
CREATE (loc1: LOCATION, {Lname: ‘Houston’})
 
CREATE (loc2: LOCATION, {Lname: ‘Stafford’})
 
CREATE (loc3: LOCATION, {Lname: ‘Bellaire’})
 
CREATE (loc4: LOCATION, {Lname: ‘Sugarland’})
 
…
(b) creating some relationships for the COMPANY data (from Figure 5.6):
 
CREATE (e1) – [ : WorksFor ] –> (d1)
 
CREATE (e3) – [ : WorksFor ] –> (d2)
 
…
 
CREATE (d1) – [ : Manager ] –> (e2)
 
CREATE (d2) – [ : Manager ] –> (e4)
 
…
 
CREATE (d1) – [ : LocatedIn ] –> (loc1)
 
CREATE (d1) – [ : LocatedIn ] –> (loc3)
 
CREATE (d1) – [ : LocatedIn ] –> (loc4)
 
CREATE (d2) – [ : LocatedIn ] –> (loc2)
 
…
 
CREATE (e1) – [ : WorksOn, {Hours: ‘32.5’} ] –> (p1)
 
CREATE (e1) – [ : WorksOn, {Hours: ‘7.5’} ] –> (p2)
 
CREATE (e2) – [ : WorksOn, {Hours: ‘10.0’} ] –> (p1)
 
CREATE (e2) – [ : WorksOn, {Hours: 10.0} ] –> (p2)
 
CREATE (e2) – [ : WorksOn, {Hours: ‘10.0’} ] –> (p3)
 
CREATE (e2) – [ : WorksOn, {Hours: 10.0} ] –> (p4)
 
…
Figure 24.4 
Examples in Neo4j using the Cypher language. (a) Creating some nodes. (b) Creating some relationships.

 
24.6 NOSQL Graph Databases and Neo4j 
907
(c) Basic simplified syntax of some common Cypher clauses:
 
Finding nodes and relationships that match a pattern: MATCH <pattern>
 
Specifying aggregates and other query variables: WITH <specifications>
 
Specifying conditions on the data to be retrieved: WHERE <condition>
 
Specifying the data to be returned: RETURN <data>
 
Ordering the data to be returned: ORDER BY <data>
 
Limiting the number of returned data items: LIMIT <max number>
 
Creating nodes: CREATE <node, optional labels and properties>
 
Creating relationships: CREATE <relationship, relationship type and optional properties>
 
Deletion: DELETE <nodes or relationships>
 
Specifying property values and labels: SET <property values and labels>
 
Removing property values and labels: REMOVE <property values and labels>
(d) Examples of simple Cypher queries:
1. MATCH (d : DEPARTMENT {Dno: ‘5’}) – [ : LocatedIn ] → (loc)
 
RETURN d.Dname , loc.Lname
2. MATCH (e: EMPLOYEE {Empid: ‘2’}) – [ w: WorksOn ] → (p)
 
RETURN e.Ename , w.Hours, p.Pname
3. MATCH (e ) – [ w: WorksOn ] → (p: PROJECT {Pno: 2})
 
RETURN p.Pname, e.Ename , w.Hours
4. MATCH (e) – [ w: WorksOn ] → (p)
 
RETURN e.Ename , w.Hours, p.Pname
 
ORDER BY e.Ename
5. MATCH (e) – [ w: WorksOn ] → (p)
 
RETURN e.Ename , w.Hours, p.Pname
 
ORDER BY e.Ename
 
LIMIT 10
6. MATCH (e) – [ w: WorksOn ] → (p)
 
WITH e, COUNT(p) AS numOfprojs
 
WHERE numOfprojs > 2
 
RETURN e.Ename , numOfprojs
 
ORDER BY numOfprojs
7. MATCH (e) – [ w: WorksOn ] → (p)
 
RETURN e , w, p
 
ORDER BY e.Ename
 
LIMIT 10
8. MATCH (e: EMPLOYEE {Empid: ‘2’})
 
SET e.Job = ‘Engineer’
Figure 24.4 (continued)
Examples in Neo4j using the Cypher language. (c) Basic syntax of Cypher queries. (d) Examples of Cypher queries.
Query 1 in Figure 24.4(d) shows how to use the MATCH and RETURN clauses in a 
query, and the query retrieves the locations for department number 5. Match speci-
fies the pattern and the query variables (d and loc) and RETURN specifies the query 
result to be retrieved by refering to the query variables. Query 2 has three variables 
(e, w, and p), and returns the projects and hours per week that the employee with 

908 
Chapter 24 NOSQL Databases and Big Data Storage Systems
Empid = 2 works on. Query 3, on the other hand, returns the employees and hours 
per week who work on the project with Pno = 2. Query 4 illustrates the ORDER BY 
clause and returns all employees and the projects they work on, sorted by Ename. It 
is also possible to limit the number of returned results by using the LIMIT clause as 
in query 5, which only returns the first 10 answers.
Query 6 illustrates the use of WITH and aggregation, although the WITH clause can 
be used to separate clauses in a query even if there is no aggregation. Query 6 also illus-
trates the WHERE clause to specify additional conditions, and the query returns the 
employees who work on more than two projects, as well as the number of projects each 
employee works on. It is also common to return the nodes and relationships them-
selves in the query result, rather than the property values of the nodes as in the previ-
ous queries. Query 7 is similar to query 5 but returns the nodes and relationships only, 
and so the query result can be displayed as a graph using Neo4j’s visualization tool. It is 
also possible to add or remove labels and properties from nodes. Query 8 shows how to 
add more properties to a node by adding a Job property to an employee node.
The above gives a brief flavor for the Cypher query language of Neo4j. The full lan-
guage manual is available online (see the bibliographic notes).
24.6.3  Neo4j Interfaces and Distributed System Characteristics
Neo4j has other interfaces that can be used to create, retrieve, and update nodes and 
relationships in a graph database. It also has two main versions: the enterprise edi-
tion, which comes with additional capabilities, and the community edition. We dis-
cuss some of the additional features of Neo4j in this subsection.
 
■Enterprise edition vs. community edition. Both editions support the Neo4j 
graph data model and storage system, as well as the Cypher graph query 
language, and several other interfaces, including a high-performance native 
API, language drivers for several popular programming languages, such as 
Java, Python, PHP, and the REST (Representational State Transfer) API. In 
addition, both editions support ACID properties. The enterprise edition 
supports additional features for enhancing performance, such as caching 
and clustering of data and locking.
 
■Graph visualization interface. Neo4j has a graph visualization interface, so 
that a subset of the nodes and edges in a database graph can be displayed as a 
graph. This tool can be used to visualize query results in a graph representation.
 
■Master-slave replication. Neo4j can be configured on a cluster of distrib-
uted system nodes (computers), where one node is designated the master 
node. The data and indexes are fully replicated on each node in the cluster. 
Various ways of synchronizing the data between master and slave nodes can 
be configured in the distributed cluster.
 
■Caching. A main memory cache can be configured to store the graph data 
for improved performance.
 
■Logical logs. Logs can be maintained to recover from failures.
