
What Readers Are Saying About Pragmatic Guide to Git
I’d heard a lot of the hype surrounding Git. It wasn’t until I read Travis’
book that I learned why people are so enthusiastic about it. Travis does a
great job explaining the power of Git in a digestible format.
Ivo Jansch
PHP evangelist, author, and founder, Egeniq.com
Git can be intimidating and frustrating to new users. Pragmatic Guide to Git
alleviates that pain with a straightforward, concise walk-through that arms
readers with exactly what they need to use Git productively.
Luigi Montanez
Software developer, Sunlight Labs
This book is a must-have for anyone using Git or just getting started with
Git. It has saved me time in ﬁnding the best practices for managing my Git
repositories and will sit on my bookshelf as the go-to resource for anything
Git.
John Mertic
Senior software engineer, SugarCRM
With two years of experience with Git, I thought I would have known most
everything in Pragmatic Guide to Git. After reading it cover to cover, I
learned that’s not the case. It’s a well-organized collection of useful Git
techniques for all audiences.
Luke Pillow
Software engineer, pillowfactory.org

Pragmatic Guide to Git
Travis Swicegood
The Pragmatic Bookshelf
Raleigh, North Carolina
Dallas, Texas

Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to distinguish their products are
claimed as trademarks. Where those designations appear in this book, and The Pragmatic Pro-
grammers, LLC was aware of a trademark claim, the designations have been printed in initial
capital letters or in all capitals. The Pragmatic Starter Kit, The Pragmatic Programmer, Pragmatic
Programming, Pragmatic Bookshelf and the linking g device are trademarks of The Pragmatic
Programmers, LLC.
Every precaution was taken in the preparation of this book. However, the publisher assumes no
responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages that may result from the use of information
(including program listings) contained herein.
Our Pragmatic courses, workshops, and other products can help you and your team create better
software and have more fun. For more information, as well as the latest Pragmatic titles, please
visit us at http://www.pragprog.com.
The team that produced this book includes:
Editor:
Susannah Davidson Pfalzer
Indexing:
Potomac Indexing, LLC
Copy edit:
Kim Wimpsett
Layout:
Steve Peter
Production:
Janet Furlow
Customer support: Ellie Callahan
International:
Juliet Benda
Copyright © 2010 Pragmatic Programmers, LLC.
All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any
form, or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the
prior consent of the publisher.
Printed in the United States of America.
ISBN-10: 1-934356-72-7
ISBN-13: 978-1-934356-72-2
Printed on acid-free paper.
P1.0 printing, October 2010
Version: 2010-10-29

Contents
Acknowledgments
8
Introduction
9
Who Is This Book For? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9 
How to Read This Book . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10 
How Git Is Different . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12 
The Git Workﬂow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13 
Online Resources
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
I
Getting Started
17
Task 1. Installing Git
20
Task 2. Conﬁguring Git
22
Task 3. Creating a New Repository
24
Task 4. Creating a Local Copy of an Existing Repository
26
II
Working with Git
28
Task 5. Seeing What Has Changed
32
Task 6. Staging Changes to Commit
34
Task 7. Committing Changes
36
Task 8. Ignoring Files
38
Task 9. Undoing Uncommitted Changes
40
Task 10. Moving Files in Git
42
Task 11. Deleting Files in Git
44

CONTENTS
6
Task 12. Sharing Changes
46
III
Organizing Your Repository with Branches and Tags
48
Task 13. Creating and Switching Branches
54
Task 14. Viewing Branches
56
Task 15. Merging Commits Between Branches
58
Task 16. Rewriting History by Rebasing
60
Task 17. Deleting Branches
62
Task 18. Tagging Milestones
64
IV
Working with a Team
66
Task 19. Adding and Removing Remotes
70
Task 20. Retrieving Remote Changes
72
Task 21. Retrieving Remote Changes, Part II
74
Task 22. Sending Changes to Remotes
76
Task 23. Handling Remote Tags and Branches
78
V
Branches and Merging Revisited
80
Task 24. Handling Conﬂicts
82
Task 25. Handling Conﬂicts with a GUI
84
Task 26. Temporarily Hiding Changes
86
Task 27. Cherry-Picking Commits
88
Task 28. Controlling How You Replay Commits
90
Task 29. Moving Branches
92
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

CONTENTS
7
VI
Working with the Repository’s History
94
Task 30. Viewing the Log
98
Task 31. Filtering the Log Output
100
Task 32. Comparing Differences
102
Task 33. Generating Statistics About Changes
104
Task 34. Assigning Blame
106
VII
Fixing Things
108
Task 35. Fixing Commits
110
Task 36. Reverting Commits
112
Task 37. Resetting Staged Changes and Commits
114
Task 38. Erasing Commits
116
Task 39. Finding Bugs with bisect
118
Task 40. Retrieving “Lost” Commits
120
VIII Moving Beyond the Basics
122
Task 41. Exporting Your Repository
124
Task 42. Doing Some Git Housekeeping
126
Task 43. Syncing with Subversion
128
Task 44. Initializing Bare Repositories
130
A
Glossary
132
Index
136
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

Acknowledgments
Like any book, this is the result of much more than an author such as me
sitting in front of their computer typing a bunch of words. Please give me a
few minutes to thank those involved in bringing this book to you.
First, I’d like to thank a reader of my ﬁrst book, who shot me an email that
planted the seed that became this book.
Next, Dave, Andy, and the entire crew at Pragmatic Bookshelf have been
great to work with a second time. Both books I’ve written for them have
been gambles—ﬁrst as a rookie author and then with this book as an author
charting the territory of a new format—and they haven’t blinked an eye.
My editor, Susannah Davidson Pfalzer, has been indispensable. She was al-
ways there with advice, tips, the occasional tough love, and an ever-optimistic
attitude; every author should be so lucky.
Reviewers of early drafts of this book provided me with a tremendous amount
of constructive feedback that helped shaped this book into what you’re hold-
ing in your hands (or looking at on your computer’s screen). Thanks to Joel
Clermont, Javier Collado, Geoff Drake, Chad Dumler-Montplaisir, Wayne
Huang, Michael Hunger, Ivo Jansch, Jerry Kuch, Johnathan Meehan, John
Mertic, Luigi Montanez, Karl Pfalzer, Luke Pillow, Christophe Portneuve,
Tom Sartain, Stefan Turalski, Tom Van Herreweghe, Matt Warren, and Nick
Watts.
No acknowledgments for a book on an open source tool would be complete
without acknowledging the work of the legion of volunteers who made the
project possible. A huge debt is owed by all of us who use Git to the nearly
700 people who have contributed to the project.
My family and friends, in particular my wife (whom I’m lucky enough to
count as both), have been amazing—as always. Without their support, and
that of the rest of my family and friends, this book would not have happened.

Introduction
The world of version control systems (VCSs) has undergone a major shift
over the past few years. Fast, reliable, and approachable distributed version
control systems (DVCSs) such as Git have burst onto the scene and changed
the landscape of open source software development and corporate software
workﬂows.
This book is your guide to this new paradigm. It’s not a complete reference;
instead, it focuses on getting you up and running quickly. Pragmatic Guide to
Git covers the 95 percent of Git that you’ll use at least once a week, as well
as a few tasks that will come in handy but aren’t used as often.
Git started when the license of VCS software that the Linux kernel used to
track changes was revoked. After investigating the other alternatives, Linus
Torvalds decided he could write a better version control system in a few weeks
than what currently existed, so he set off to do that.
Git, then in a very rough form, was the result of that two weeks of hacking
together some shell scripts back in the spring of 2005. Linus had to calculate
pieces of the commits by hand on the ﬁrst few commits (commits are the
changes Git tracks for you). Since those original hand-rolled commits, Git
has become the leader in the ﬁeld of DVCS.
Who Is This Book For?
This book is geared for someone new to Git who is looking to get up to speed
quickly. This book is for you if you’re already familiar with another VCS
such as Subversion and are looking for a quick guide to the Git landscape or
if you’re a quick study and want a concise guide. It’s organized by task to
make it easy to translate from the task you need to accomplish to how the
process works in Git.
If you’ve never used a version control system before and thought Subversion
was something you did to overthrow governments, this book will get you up
and running with Git. For much more detail on version control concepts, you
should read Pragmatic Version Control Using Git,1 my other book, as well.
1.
http://pragprog.com/titles/tsgit/ 

HOW TO READ THIS BOOK
10
How to Read This Book
This book is organized in parts to guide you from starting out through more
complex situations, with each part broken down into tasks. Tasks follow a
speciﬁc formula: the left page explains the task and the commands related to
it, and the right page gives you the raw commands with a little bit of informa-
tion about them and a cross-reference to related tasks.
You can read this book in paper form as an open book to see the tasks side
by side, but it’s also an excellent reference in digital form, especially when
searching for a particular Git task.
If you’re reading a digital version of this book on a computer with a large
enough display, I recommend setting your reader to display two pages side by
side instead of a single page. That gives you the same visual that’s intended
in the book.
On your ﬁrst pass, I suggest that you read the introductions to each part. They
give you a broad overview of how to approach each part of the Git workﬂow,
as well as a synopsis of the tasks contained in that part.
Armed with high-level information, you can determine where to dive in. You
can read this book from start to ﬁnish or cherry-pick the tasks relevant to what
you’re trying to accomplish.
The parts of this book are organized to walk you through the various phases
of use in Git.
• Part I, Getting Started, starts with the absolute basics—installing and
conﬁguring Git and creating your ﬁrst repository.
• Part II, Working with Git, covers the basic commands you need as
part of your day-to-day interaction with Git by yourself. These are the
building blocks, and they’re a must-read if this is your ﬁrst time using
Git.
• Part III, Organizing Your Repository with Branches and Tags, intro-
duces branches, a powerful and central part of Git that’s necessary for
understanding how everything works together.
• Part IV, Working with a Team, covers the most powerful aspect of any
VCS: collaborating with other developers. This part gets you up to
speed on how to share your work with other developers and retrieve
changes from them.
• Part V, Branches and Merging Revisited, builds on the information in
Part III and teaches you how to handle it when things go wrong, as
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

HOW TO READ THIS BOOK
11
well as some of the more complex ways to handle merging and moving
branches around.
• Part VI, Working with the Repository’s History, introduces you to all
the history you’ve been generating. Using this information, you can
ﬁgure out what another developer (or maybe even you) was thinking
when you made a particular change.
• Part VII, Fixing Things, shows you how Git can help you ﬁx things in
your repository—be that commits that need to be adjusted or ﬁnding
bugs in your code.
• Part VIII, Moving Beyond the Basics, introduces you to a few concepts
that don’t ﬁt into the normal everyday workﬂow but are useful when
they’re needed.
There are diagrams throughout this book. Whenever you see a circle, it repre-
sents a commit—with the exception of Figure 2, on page 16, where the circles
represent repositories.
This matches the style used throughout the Git manual when it shows example
repository structures to explain commands. In addition to the standard graph-
ical diagrams throughout, in some places I’ve opted for a plain-text diagram
to introduce you to the Git manual diagram style.
Throughout the book you’ll see examples of the output you can expect Git
to generate for a given command. Keep in mind that your output won’t be
exactly the same because of the way Git keeps track of commit IDs—more
on that in a minute.
Several commands don’t generate any output after they run successfully,
though. For these commands, I include an empty prompt> after the success-
ful command to show that there is no output.
The ﬁrst reference to each new term includes an explanation of what the term
means. If you read the book from start to ﬁnish, you’ll know all of the terms
from previous introductions to them.
Did you forget a term or are you using the book as a reference and not reading
it straight through? You’re covered there, too. You can refer to Appendix A,
on page 132; there you’ll get explanations of all the common—and some not
so common—jargon you’ll encounter in this book and in your adventures in
Git.
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

HOW GIT IS DIFFERENT
12
What Version of Git to Use
I used the 1.7.x version of Git while writing the majority of this book. All of
the commands as of this writing work with 1.7.2.1 and should work with the
majority of Git 1.6.x versions.
The installation methods mentioned in Task 1, Installing Git, on page 20 all
have recent versions of Git available, so make sure you’re running a recent
version, and you won’t have any trouble following along. You can run git
--version from the command line to see what version you have.
Before we dive into the tasks, let’s talk a bit about Git and what makes it
unique.
How Git Is Different
Git is a bit different from traditional version control systems. If you’re com-
ing to Git from another centralized system, this section explains some of the
differences and gets you thinking in Git style.
Distributed vs. Centralized
There are generally two models in version control systems: centralized and
distributed. Tools such as Subversion typically require a network connection
to a centralized server. You make a change to your project and then commit
that change, which is sent to the centralized server to track. Other developers
can then immediately access your changes.
Distributed version control systems, such as Git, break the process of com-
mitting code and sharing it with others into two parts. You can commit your
code to your local private repository without having to talk to a centralized
server, removing the need to be connected to a network to make a change.
Private vs. Public Repositories
Each developer who is sharing code with other developers has at least two
repositories: a private and a public repository. The private repository is the
one that exists on your computer and is the one you make commits to.
Public repositories are the repository that you use to share your changes with
other developers. Multiple developers might have access to push changes to
the same public repository, or each developer may have their own public
repositories.
You can push to and fetch from multiple repositories. This allows you to pull
in changes from another developer who’s working on the same project.
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

THE GIT WORKFLOW
13
Commit IDs Instead of Revision Numbers
Centralized VCS have the beneﬁt of having one system that doles out revi-
sion numbers. Because everyone is committing and sharing their code in one
repository, that repository can control what numbers it assigns to a particular
commit.
That model doesn’t work in a decentralized system. Who’s to say which com-
mit is actually the second commit, me or you? Git uses commit IDs that are
SHA-1 hashes instead. The hash is based on the code, what came before it,
who made the commit, when they made it, and a few other pieces of metadata.
The chances are incredibly small of there being two different commits with
the same commit ID.
Forking Is Good
For the longest time, forking a project was a bad thing. It drained resources
away from the main project, and merging changes between the two projects
was time-consuming when possible.
Git’s superior merge capabilities, rooted in its distributed nature, make merg-
ing changes from a “forked” repository trivial. In fact, the idea of forking is
so ingrained in the Git community that one of the largest Git communities
online, GitHub,2 is built around the concept. To offer your changes, you fork
a repository, commit your changes, and then ask the original developer to pull
your changes in through a pull request.
Instead of an indicator of a project suffering from internal strife, the num-
ber of forks on a repository is considered the sign of an active community
working on a project.
The Git Workﬂow
Working by yourself on a project with no version control, you hack a little, test
it out and see whether it does what you want, tweak a few more lines of code,
and repeat. Adding version control into the mix, you start committing those
tweaks to keep a record of them. The high-level overview of Git’s general
workﬂow is shown in Figure 1, on the next page.
My Standard Workﬂow
My standard day working with Git goes something like this: I fetch all the
changes from the other developers on my team to make sure I’m working
with the latest code, and then I start working on the user stories I have for the
day. As I make changes, I create a handful of commits—a separate commit
for each change that I make.
2.
http://github.com/
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

THE GIT WORKFLOW
14
Fetch Changes 
from the Team
Make Changes
& Commit Them
(repeat until done)
Review Commits
Share Changes
with the Team
Start your day here
Figure 1: The Git workﬂow
Occasionally, I end up with several separate changes that all need to be com-
mitted. I’ll break out Git’s patch mode, stage, and ﬁnally commit each set of
changes separately.
Once I have the feature complete, I give the commits I’ve created a quick
review to make sure all the changes are necessary. At this point I look for
commits that can be combined and make sure they are in the most logical
order.
Finally, once I have those commits ready, I share those commits by push-
ing them (push is the term for sending commits to another repository) back
upstream to my public repository so the rest of the team can view them and
integrate them with their repositories.
Small Teams with a Shared Repository
Many small teams use Git like a traditional version control system. They have
one main repository that all the developers can send changes to, and each
developer has their own private repository to track their changes in.
You make your changes locally; then when you’re ready to share them with
other developers, you push them back to the repository you all share.
If someone else has shared their changes since the last time you updated from
the shared repository, you will get an error. You must ﬁrst get the changes
from the shared repository and integrate them into your repository through
a process called merging. Once the changes are merged, you can push your
changes to share with the rest of the team.
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

THE GIT WORKFLOW
15
Git in Open Source
Each open source project has its own methods of accepting changes. Some
projects use a fully distributed model where only one person can push changes
to the main repository, and that person is responsible for merging changes
from all the contributors into the main repository.
Having only one person capable of pushing changes is often too demanding
a job for a large open source project. Many have a main repository that all of
the committers can send changes to.
The main developers encourage people who are just starting out to fork their
project—create a copy of the repository somewhere else—so the main devel-
opers and other members of the community can review their changes. If
they’re accepted, one of the main contributors merges them back into the
project’s repository.
These different scenarios constitute different repository layouts. Git allows
several different layouts, and covering them deserves a section to itself.
Repository Layouts
The distributed nature of Git gives you a lot of ﬂexibility in how you manage
your repositories. Every person on your team has their own private repository
—the repository that only that person can update. However, there are two
distinct ways to handle public repositories. For a visual explanation of these
layouts, see Figure 2, on the following page.
One method is the fully distributed model. In this, each developer has their
own public repository that the developer uses to publish their changes to.
All the other developers on the team then pull changes from everyone else’s
repositories to keep current.
In practice, most teams have a lead developer who is responsible for making
sure all the changes are integrated. This limits the number of repositories you
and your team have to pull changes from to one, but it increases the workload
on the person who has to integrate everyone’s changes.
Another method is the shared repository model, where all developers can push
to a shared repository. This resembles the standard centralized model and is
often adopted by teams when they ﬁrst start using Git—it requires the least
amount of mental overhead when it comes to thinking about where a change
is shared.
You can mix both of these as well to create a hybrid solution. Use a shared
repository for all of the code that’s ready for production, and each developer
maintains their own public repository for sharing code that’s still a work in
progress. This is the model I’ve employed successfully at my company and
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

ONLINE RESOURCES
16
You
Bob
Alice
Shared
Repository
You
Bob
Alice
Push
Pull
Distributed
Repositories
Figure 2: Shared and distributed repository layout with three developers. Gray
circles are the private repositories; outlined circles are public repositories.
that’s used by many open source projects—push ﬁnal changes to the main
repository, and keep experimentation in your own repository.
Online Resources
Several online resources are available for this book. The book’s website is the
jumping-off point for all of them:
http://pragprog.com/titles/pg_git/
From here, you can view the errata (and add any errors you ﬁnd) and head to
the book’s forum where you can discuss and ask questions—both about the
book and about Git.
Now that you know what this book is about, let’s get started.
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

Part I
Getting Started

GETTING STARTED
18
Ready to get started with Git?3 Git is an extremely powerful tool
that’s relatively easy to start using. Like all software, it requires instal-
lation and minimal setup before you can start using it.
Covered in this part:
• We start off with Task 1, Installing Git, on page 20 to handle
installation. Git’s heritage in the Linux world means it can be
compiled directly from source, but there are other (easier)
options for every major operating system.
• You need to tell Git a few conﬁguration settings before you
start using it, covered in Task 2, Conﬁguring Git, on page 22.
• Now that Git is installed and conﬁgured, you start using it in
Task 3, Creating a New Repository, on page 24. You learn how
to create a completely new repository.
• Another way to start a Git repository is to create a clone of
someone else’s repository, covered in Task 4, Creating a Local
Copy of an Existing Repository, on page 26.
Once you’ve made it through these basic steps, you’ll be ready
to start working with Git. Feel free to skim the following tasks if you
already have Git installed and conﬁgured and have created a new
repository or cloned an existing one.
3.
I promise, no more get/Git puns the rest of the book.
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

GETTING STARTED
19
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

INSTALLING GIT
20
1
Installing Git
You can install Git in several different ways: by using one of the GUI
installers, by using a package management system, or, in the time-honored
Linux tradition that spawned Git, by compiling it from source.
Don’t worry if you’re not ready to start compiling software; all major
operating systems provide alternatives to compiling Git yourself. For
example, Ubuntu provides Git via its apt-get tool, so a few commands from
the terminal are enough to get you going. Likewise, OS X users have the
option of using MacPorts4 or the new Homebrew5 to handle the installation.
Not to be left out, Windows users who use Cygwin6 can also install it via
Cygwin’s setup.exe.
Windows and OS X users who prefer GUI installations have alternatives
available as well. Windows users can use the msysGit7 installer to get up and
running, and OS X users can install Git using the Git OS X Installer8 to
install Git via a DMG.
The original way to install Git, which is still the best if you want to remain
on the latest version, is to build it from source. The various dependencies can
be hard to track down, especially if you plan on building the user manual.
Tools like apt-get build-dep on Ubuntu are helpful for tracking down all of
the dependencies.
Watch mixing installation tools. For example, if you use a Mac and have
installed most of your software using MacPorts, stick with MacPorts; if you
compile all your own software on Linux, now probably isn’t the time to start
using apt-get. Switching to Git provides you with enough learning
opportunities, so be careful to guard that installing Git doesn’t cause the yak
to get a trim.9
4.
http://www.macports.org/
5.
http://github.com/mxcl/homebrew—Homebrew is relatively new tool that handles compiling
software on a Mac. It stores all of its formulas, the instructions for installing software, in a Git
repository.
6.
http://www.cygwin.com/
7.
http://code.google.com/p/msysgit/
8.
http://code.google.com/p/git-osx-installer/
9.
http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/yak_shaving
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

INSTALLING GIT
21
Compile Git from its source code.
Download the latest tarball from the Git website.10
prompt> tar -xjf git-YOUR-VERSION.tar.bz2
prompt> cd git-YOUR-VERSION
prompt> make
prompt> make install
You can compile the documentation from source as well. Replace the last
two lines in the previous steps with this:
prompt> make all doc
prompt> make install install-doc
Install Git on Ubuntu.
prompt> sudo apt-get install git-core
To install the user manual, do this:
prompt> sudo apt-get install git-doc
To install the Git to Subversion functionality, do this:
prompt> sudo apt-get install git-svn
You can use apt-get to handle all of the dependencies and then compile Git
from source using the previous steps.
prompt> sudo apt-get build-dep git-core git-doc git-svn
Install Git on OS X.
You can use MacPorts and install Git with SVN functionality:
prompt> sudo port install git-core +svn
There is also a Git Installer for OS X available on Google Code.
Install on Windows.
Download latest msysGit installer from here:
http://code.google.com/p/msysgit/
Or, install as part of Cygwin’s setup process.
10. http://git-scm.com/
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

CONFIGURING GIT
22
2
Conﬁguring Git
Git requires some conﬁguration to work. You must tell Git your name and
your email address since there is no central repository to keep track of that
information. Git uses both to calculate the commit ID—an SHA-111
hash—that identiﬁes each commit.
The ﬁrst two commands on the next page use --global to specify that they
are conﬁguration values for every repository you interact with on this
machine. The conﬁguration ﬁle is stored in ~/.gitconﬁg. You can edit the
ﬁle directly in addition to using the git conﬁg command.
You can set every setting on a global or per-repository basis. By leaving
--global out of the command, the settings will be stored in the repository’s
.git/conﬁg ﬁle.
You might want to set a few other useful conﬁguration values while
conﬁguring Git. You can set color.ui to auto if you like to have your
command-line interfaces colorized.
The auto setting tells Git to use color whenever it is generating output to be
displayed but to render plain text whenever the output is being piped to
another process. This makes it easy to output a raw diff—the changes
between two versions of the ﬁle—to a ﬁle but still allows you to see the
colorized diff when you view the output directly.
Finally, Git uses core.editor to specify a particular editor. Git launches an
editor whenever you need to create a commit message, edit patches, and do a
few other tasks.
Git doesn’t require you to set the core.editor value, though. It tries to ﬁgure
out what editor to use by checking the following values, in order:
GIT_EDITOR environment variable; core.editor conﬁguration value; VISUAL
environment variable; EDITOR environment variable; and, ﬁnally, plain vi.
The value is the command-line script to launch your editor. In Windows, this
is a bit tricky, but there’s an excellent thread on Stack Overﬂow12 that can
help you get started.
11. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SHA
12. http://j.mp/git-editor-on-windows
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

CONFIGURING GIT
23
Conﬁgure Git to know who you are.
prompt> git config --global user.name "Your Name"
prompt> git config --global user.email "user@domain.com"
prompt>
Set the Git user for a speciﬁc repository.
prompt> cd /path/to/repository
prompt> git config user.name "Your Name"
prompt> git config user.email "user@domain.com"
prompt>
Turn colors on wherever possible in the Git UI.
prompt> git config --global color.ui auto
prompt>
Conﬁgure Git’s editor.
prompt> git config --global core.editor /path/to/editor
prompt>
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

CREATING A NEW REPOSITORY
24
3
Creating a New Repository
Repositories in Git are stored on your local ﬁle system right alongside the
code they track. You create a repository by typing git init in the directory that
you want to start tracking ﬁles in.
You use two repositories in Git to collaborate with others: a private one and a
public one. Your private repository—the one we’re creating here—is where
you do all your work. It’s the repository with the working tree.
This two-tier system gives you the ability to track local experimental
changes while only sharing changes via your public repository that are ready
for others to work with. Be careful that you don’t allow yourself to code in a
cave, though. Hoarding all your changes until they are “just right” is the
quickest way to harm a project. Share early; share often.
git init creates a .git directory in your current directory and initializes the Git
repository inside that. Once you’ve initialized a repository, you still need to
add and commit the ﬁles using git add (see Task 6, Staging Changes to
Commit, on page 34) and git commit (see Task 7, Committing Changes, on
page 36), respectively, but both of these require an initialized repository ﬁrst.
You have to initialize the repository only once.
Once you’ve initialized a repository, you have a working tree that you can
interact with. The working tree is your view into what’s stored in your
repository. It typically represents the latest copy of what’s stored in your
repository.
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

CREATING A NEW REPOSITORY
25
Create a repository.
prompt> mkdir some-repository
prompt> cd some-repository
prompt> git init
For example, to create a repository called widgets in the /work directory,
use this:
prompt> mkdir /work/widgets
prompt> cd /work/widgets
prompt> git init
Initialized empty Git repository in /work/widgets/.git/
Create a repository in an existing directory, and add all ﬁles
from that directory.
prompt> cd /path/to/some/directory
prompt> git init
prompt> git add .
prompt> git commit -m "some commit message"
For example, to create a repository inside an existing directory called
/work/existing-widget, use this:
prompt> cd /work/existing-widget
prompt> git init
Initialized empty Git repository in /work/existing-widget/.git/
prompt> git add .
prompt> git commit -m "initial commit"
[master (root-commit) 6e477fa] initial commit
101 files changed, 4083 insertions(+), 0 deletions(-)
create mode 100644 AUTHORS
... and 100 more files ...
Related Tasks
• Task 4, Creating a Local Copy of an Existing Repository, on the next
page
• Task 7, Committing Changes, on page 36
• Task 12, Sharing Changes, on page 46
• Task 44, Initializing Bare Repositories, on page 130
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

CREATING A LOCAL COPY OF AN EXISTING REPOSITORY
26
4
Creating a Local Copy of an Existing
Repository
You need to create a clone of a remote repository to start making changes to
it. The git clone command initializes a new repository on your computer
and fetches the entire history—all the changes that have been tracked during
the life of that repository. After it’s complete, you can start making changes
to the ﬁles in your local working tree and tracking commits locally.
Sometimes you don’t need the entire history of the repository. You don’t
always need the last ten years of changes—the last year’s might sufﬁce. You
can use the --depth parameter to limit how many revisions you fetch. This is
called a shallow repository.
There are a few limitations to this type of repository clone. For example, you
can’t create another clone from it. There is a place for these clones, however.
Say you want to submit a patch—a change—to a project with a long history.
You only need the recent changes to show your change against, so a shallow
repository is perfect.
Depending on how the ﬁrewall on your computer or local area network
(LAN) is conﬁgured, you might get an error trying to clone a remote
repository over the network. Git uses SSH by default to transfer changes
over the network, but it also uses the Git protocol (signiﬁed by having git://
at the beginning of the URI) on port 9418. Check with your local network
administrator to make sure communication on ports 22—the port SSH
communicates on—and 9418 are open if you have trouble communicating
with a remote repository.
You use git clone to fetch changes when a repository already exists, but you
don’t have to clone a repository to work with a remote repository. Remote
repositories are repositories that you can talk to, generally over a network, to
push and pull changes from. You can initialize a new repository, like we
talked about in Task 3, Creating a New Repository, on page 24, and then add
a remote repository later with the git remote command (see Task 19, Adding
and Removing Remotes, on page 70).
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

CREATING A LOCAL COPY OF AN EXISTING REPOSITORY
27
Clone a repository.
prompt> git clone some-repository
... example ...
prompt> git clone git://github.com/tswicegood/bobby-tables.git
Cloning into bobby-tables...
remote: Counting objects: 39, done.
remote: Compressing objects: 100% (25/25), done.
remote: Total 39 (delta 16), reused 26 (delta 9)
Receiving objects: 100% (39/39), 39.23 KiB, done.
Resolving deltas: 100% (16/16), done.
Clone a repository into a speciﬁc path.
prompt> git clone some-repository some-path
... example ...
prompt> git clone git://github.com/tswicegood/bobby-tables.git btbls
Cloning into btbls...
remote: Counting objects: 39, done.
remote: Compressing objects: 100% (25/25), done.
remote: Total 39 (delta 16), reused 26 (delta 9)
Receiving objects: 100% (39/39), 39.23 KiB, done.
Resolving deltas: 100% (16/16), done.
Create a shallow clone with the last ﬁfty commits.
prompt> git clone --depth 50 some-repository
These are valid Git repository URIs.
user@ssh host:path_to_repo
git://some_domain/path_to_repo
http://some_domain/path_to_repo/
https://some_domain/path_to_repo/path/to/repo
Related Tasks
• Task 3, Creating a New Repository, on page 24
• Task 12, Sharing Changes, on page 46
• Task 19, Adding and Removing Remotes, on page 70
• Task 44, Initializing Bare Repositories, on page 130
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

Part II
Working with Git

WORKING WITH GIT
29
Now that you have Git and your repository set up, it’s time to start
learning how to interact with Git. A handful of commands are all
you need to get you through most tasks. Once you ﬁnish the tasks in
this part, you’ll know them all.
As we saw in the introduction, the workﬂow in Git is different from
other version control systems and deﬁnitely different from working
without any version control system. Each time you make a change
you want to track, you need to commit it.
The workﬂow goes like this. First, create your repository—either cre-
ate a new repository or clone an existing one. Then make some
changes, test that they do what you want, commit those changes,
make some more changes, and so on. Finally, you share those
changes when they’re ready.
One thing to keep in mind when working with a distributed version
control system (DVCS) like Git is that committing a change and shar-
ing that change are two different processes. This is different from
centralized VCS such as Subversion and CVS, where the two actions
are synonymous.
This separation provides you with a lot of freedom. You can experi-
ment locally, try a whole bunch of things, and then share the best
solution, but to paraphrase an old uncle, “With great freedom
comes great responsibility.”
Lots of small, discrete changes that touch very speciﬁc portions of
the code are better than a few monolithic changes. Make sure you
don’t sit on a whole bunch of changes until they’re perfect. First,
they’ll never be perfect. There’s always something else to refactor
and abstract away. Second, the bigger the change becomes, the
harder it becomes to fully understand, review, and test.
Third, it makes tracking down bugs later easier. Tools such as git bisect
(see Task 39, Finding Bugs with bisect, on page 118) make ﬁnding
which commit introduced a bug easy. Smaller commits mean that
once you know which commit caused the bug, you can ﬁgure out
the exact change that much faster.
We’ve already covered how to create a new repository or clone an
existing one (git init and git clone in Task 3, Creating a New Reposi-
tory, on page 24 and Task 4, Creating a Local Copy of an Existing
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

WORKING WITH GIT
30
Repository, on page 26, respectively). Making changes and testing
are up to you and how you interact with the code in your project.
Seeing what changes need to be committed is where we pick up.
The tasks in this part are ordered roughly the same way you’ll use
them in Git.
Covered in this part:
• The ﬁrst thing is seeing what has changed. We cover this in Task
5, Seeing What Has Changed, on page 32, which shows you
how to compare your working tree with what the repository
knows about.
• After you know what has changed, then you need to stage
the changes you want to commit. This is covered in Task 6,
Staging Changes to Commit, on page 34.
• The changes are staged; now it’s time to commit them. Task 7,
Committing Changes, on page 36 shows you how to create a
commit and add a log message to it.
• With any project, ﬁles will be generated that you don’t need
to commit. Task 8, Ignoring Files, on page 38 teaches you how
to tell Git to ignore those ﬁles.
• What happens when you accidentally stage a ﬁle you didn’t
mean to or you decide that you want to get rid of a change
that you made to a ﬁle before committing it? Task 9, Undo-
ing Uncommitted Changes, on page 40 covers how to undo
those staged changes so you don’t accidentally commit
something.
• Files sometimes need to change where they live. A new pro-
ject layout is adopted, or ﬁles or directories are renamed. Task
10, Moving Files in Git, on page 42 shows you how to handle
these inevitable changes.
• Likewise, some ﬁles or directories outlive their usefulness. Since
the repository keeps a record of all ﬁles that it has ever
tracked, you can delete those old ﬁles without worrying about
not having them to reference later if you need to do so. Task
11, Deleting Files in Git, on page 44 shows you how.
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

WORKING WITH GIT
31
• Finally, Task 12, Sharing Changes, on page 46 is a whirlwind
tour of how to share changes with other developers. It’s done
at 30,000 feet and is enough to get you started. A lot more
about collaboration is covered in Part IV, Working with a Team.
Now, let’s dive into the speciﬁcs.
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

SEEING WHAT HAS CHANGED
32
5
Seeing What Has Changed
Your local repository tracks changes. Before you start committing just
anything, you need to see what changes exist between your working tree and
your repository and what changes are staged and ready to commit. git status
is the tool for the job.
git status has several different outputs, depending on what’s in your working
tree. The example on the next page is from one of my repositories, and it
contains all three types of outputs: staged changes, changes to known ﬁles,
and untracked ﬁles. Let’s go over them in reverse order of how they appear
on the next page—the order of least important to most.
Starting at lines 14 and ending at 17, Git outputs the ﬁles and paths that it
doesn’t know anything about—the ﬁles that you haven’t told Git about yet.
This section has the header Untracked ﬁles before it starts, and if you turned
on color output like we discussed in Task 2, Conﬁguring Git, on page 22, it
displays the ﬁles and paths in red.
Next up are the ﬁles that Git knows about but that have changed. These are
listed between lines 8 and 12 and are preceded by Changed but not
updated. Like untracked ﬁles, these show up as red if you have colors
conﬁgured.
Finally, the top section listed between lines 3 and 6 shows what ﬁles you
would commit if you ran git commit right now. For more on committing,
ﬂip to Task 7, Committing Changes, on page 36. Files in this section show
up as green if you turned colors on and are preceded by Changes to be
committed.
Depending on the state of your repository, the output from git status might
contain any of those sections or none at all. It adapts itself as needed.
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

SEEING WHAT HAS CHANGED
33
What the status of a new repository looks like.
If you just created a repository using git init, this is what your repository
looks like:
prompt> git status
# On branch master
#
# Initial commit
#
nothing to commit (create/copy files and use "git add" to track)
What git status looks like in a repository with changes.
git status requires a repository with some changes in its working tree to see
the various output. The following is the output of git status on my local
Castanaut repository:
Line 1
prompt> git status
-
# On branch master
-
# Changes to be committed:
-
#
(use "git reset HEAD <file>..." to unstage)
5
#
-
#
modified:
castanaut.gemspec
-
#
-
# Changed but not updated:
-
#
(use "git add <file>..." to update what will be committed)
10
#
(use "git checkout -- <file>..." to discard changes in ...
-
#
-
#
modified:
README.txt
-
#
-
# Untracked files:
15
#
(use "git add <file>..." to include in what will be ...
-
#
-
#
pkg/
What git status looks like with no changes.
prompt> git status
# On branch master
nothing to commit (working directory clean)
Related Tasks
• Task 3, Creating a New Repository, on page 24
• Task 6, Staging Changes to Commit, on the next page
• Task 7, Committing Changes, on page 36
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

STAGING CHANGES TO COMMIT
34
6
Staging Changes to Commit
Git uses a two-step process to get changes into the repository. The ﬁrst step
is staging changes through git add. Staging a change adds it to the index, or
staging area. This sits between the working tree—your view of the
repository—and the actual repository.
Through the staging area, you can control what is staged from the most
coarse-grained—adding everything within the repository—down to editing
the changes, line by line.
First you can select individual ﬁles or paths to add by calling git add and
passing the ﬁlename or path as the parameter. Git adds everything under a
path if you provide that. It uses standard shell-style wildcards, so wildcards
work: base.* matches base.rb and base.py.
Another quick way to add all ﬁles is the -A parameter. This adds all the ﬁles
inside the repository that are not explicitly ignored (see Task 8, Ignoring
Files, on page 38). Closely related, you can add ﬁles that have changed using
the -u parameter. It doesn’t add any new ﬁles, though, only ﬁles that have
already been tracked and have modiﬁcations in them.
You can control which parts of a ﬁle you commit using the -p parameter.
Running this, you’re presented with each section of the ﬁle that has changed,
and you’re given the opportunity to add or skip it. You can stage the change
by pressing y or skip a change with n. s lets you break the change into
smaller pieces. This and a few other options aren’t always available. You can
press ? inside patch mode to get a list of all the commands and what they do.
Taking the control a step further, you can directly edit the changes that are
being staged by using the -e parameter. This opens the diff in your
conﬁgured editor (we talked about that in Task 2, Conﬁguring Git, on
page 22). Your editor has the ﬁle in a diff format—additions are preﬁxed
with +, and removals are preﬁxed with -.
One quirk of Git is that it can’t track empty directories (at least as of version
1.7.2.1). There’s a reason for this in the underlying architecture and the way
Git tracks data in the repository, but that’s a bigger topic than this page
allows for. To track an “empty” directory, you can add an empty dot ﬁle (a
ﬁle beginning with a dot). An empty .gitignore works (see Task 8, Ignoring
Files, on page 38). I use .include_in_git.
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

STAGING CHANGES TO COMMIT
35
Stage an entire ﬁle to commit.
prompt> git add path/to/file
... or ...
prompt> git add path/
... or everything under the current directory ...
prompt> git add .
prompt>
Add all ﬁles in the current repository.
prompt> git add -A|--all
prompt>
Add all tracked ﬁles that have been changed.
prompt> git add -u|--update
prompt>
Choose which changes to commit.
prompt> git add -p|--patch
... or a specific file ...
prompt> git add -p path/to/file
prompt>
Open the current diff in the editor.
prompt> git add -e
... or a specific file ...
prompt> git add -e path/to/file
prompt>
Related Tasks
• Task 5, Seeing What Has Changed, on page 32
• Task 7, Committing Changes, on the next page
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

COMMITTING CHANGES
36
7
Committing Changes
Git tracks changes to your repository through commits, which you make
with the git commit command. It is the workhorse of Git and something
you’ll use a ton.
Prior to most commits, you need to stage the ﬁles you want to commit using
the git add. You can use it to stage speciﬁc changes, portions of ﬁles, and
other things that are covered in more detail in Task 6, Staging Changes to
Commit, on page 34.
Each commit requires a commit message. You can use -m and a string in
quotation marks as your message or use Git’s editor to write a message.
There’s more information on the editor in Task 2, Conﬁguring Git, on
page 22. You can specify multiple paragraphs by specifying multiple -m
parameters.
You can avoid git add and commit every change in your working tree with
the -a parameter. It commits everything you have staged and all the changes
to your working tree.
Because Git breaks committing and sharing into two separate tasks, you can
change commits that haven’t been shared. We’ve all accidentally committed
a ﬁle that we weren’t supposed to and realized the second after we hit Enter
that there was a problem with the commit. You can amend your commit with
the --amend parameter. You can add -C HEAD (HEAD points to the latest
commit in your branch) to the call to reuse the commit’s original log
message if you don’t need to change it. There’s more on --amend in Task
35, Fixing Commits, on page 110.
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

COMMITTING CHANGES
37
Stage and commit changes.
prompt> git add <some file>
prompt> git commit -m "Some message"
[master a276f08] Some message
1 files changed, 2 insertions(+), 0 deletions(-)
Commit all modiﬁed ﬁles.
prompt> git commit -m "Some message" -a
[master 5d251db] Some message
1 files changed, 1 insertions(+), 0 deletions(-)
Commit and launch editor for commit message.
prompt> git add <some file>
prompt> git commit
Related Tasks
• Task 5, Seeing What Has Changed, on page 32
• Task 6, Staging Changes to Commit, on page 34
• Task 12, Sharing Changes, on page 46
• Task 35, Fixing Commits, on page 110
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

IGNORING FILES
38
8
Ignoring Files
Software projects generate a lot of cruft. Some of it you don’t need to
commit. For example, I do a lot of work in Python, which leaves a ton of
.pyc ﬁles laying around, and I edit using MacVim, which creates a swap ﬁle
for each ﬁle that you’re editing. We don’t need or want these ﬁles cluttering
up our repository or showing up in git status. That’s where the .gitignore
and friends comes in.
Each line of the .gitignore is scanned, and any matches it ﬁnds are ignored
by Git. Your .gitignore ﬁle is inside your repository, so you can track it like
any other ﬁle. You can put it at the top level of your repository, and in that
case the rules cascade through all subdirectories. You can also use
subdirectory-speciﬁc .gitignore, and those rules will only apply to ﬁles and
directories inside that subdirectory.
Sometimes you don’t want to commit your .gitignore ﬁle to your repository.
Maybe you’re be contributing to an open source project—there’s no need to
add your *.swp to the project-wide .gitignore. You have two options in this
case: use the .git/info/excludes ﬁle or add the ignore cases to your global
excludesﬁle.
The .git/info/excludes is the same as a .gitignore ﬁle, except it’s not
tracked by Git since it’s inside the .git directory. It’s useful for excluding ﬁles
that are speciﬁc to a project without adding a .gitignore ﬁle to the repository.
For ﬁles that you want to ignore in every repository on your computer, you
can set the core.excludesﬁle conﬁguration value to point to a ﬁle that
contains your global ignore rules. It follows the same format as the
.gitignore and .git/info/excludes ﬁles.
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

IGNORING FILES
39
Ignore a speciﬁc ﬁle and/or path called cache.
Add the following to .gitignore:
cache
Ignore all .swp ﬁles from Vim.
Add the following to .gitignore:
*.swp
Set up a global excludes ﬁle.
Your excludesﬁle can exist anywhere you want on your computer. The
following example puts it in your home directory in the .gitignore ﬁle:
prompt> git config --global core.excludesfile \
~/.gitignore
I have the following my ~/.gitignore since I’m on a Mac and use Vim:
.DS_Store
*.swp
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

UNDOING UNCOMMITTED CHANGES
40
9
Undoing Uncommitted Changes
Git’s two-step process for tracking a commit means you can have ﬁles that
are staged for commit that you’re not ready to commit. You use git reset
HEAD or git rm --cached depending on the circumstance.
Scenario 1: You staged a change to ﬁle and want to unstage it—use git reset
HEAD. This is the most common use. You’re telling Git, “Change the
index—the staging area—to the latest version of this ﬁle.”
Scenario 2: You have a new ﬁle that’s been staged that you don’t want to
commit now—use git rm --cached. Normally, git rm is used to remove ﬁles
from your repository, but adding the --cached option tells Git to leave your
working tree alone.
Another common problem is making changes that you want to undo
completely. You can use git checkout to do this, but be careful. git
checkout happily removes all untracked changes from a ﬁle or directory.
You can’t get those changes back if they were never tracked by Git.
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

UNDOING UNCOMMITTED CHANGES
41
Unstage a modiﬁed ﬁle that’s been staged.
For example, to undo changes to cache.py, use this:
prompt> git reset HEAD -- cache.py
Unstaged changes after reset:
M
cache.py
If you’re not familiar with command-line programs, you might not recognize
that --. It tells Git that all arguments are done and that the rest are ﬁles or
paths. It’s useful when ﬁles and branch or tag names clash.
Undo all uncommitted changes to a ﬁle.
Warning: Doing this deletes ﬁles and cannot be undone.
prompt> git checkout -- cache.py
Related Tasks
• Task 36, Reverting Commits, on page 112
• Task 37, Resetting Staged Changes and Commits, on page 114
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

MOVING FILES IN GIT
42
10
Moving Files in Git
Performing tasks such as reorganizing ﬁles, changing ﬁle formats, and so on,
requires that ﬁles and sometimes entire directories get moved. git mv
handles this for you.
You provide it with two options: the name of the original ﬁle and the new
name. This works on ﬁles, directories, or symlinks—anything Git can track.
You can move ﬁles, directories, and symlinks into other directories as well.
Provide git mv a directory as the second option, and you’re set.
Git stages the change for you after you call git mv. You must call git
commit after git mv to make the move permanent.
git mv won’t overwrite an existing ﬁle; it displays an error instead. You can
override this behavior by providing --force (or -f). Be careful, though,
because this makes Git overwrite the existing ﬁle. That’s dangerous if the
existing ﬁle you’re overwriting isn’t tracked by Git. You have no way of
getting that ﬁle back.
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

MOVING FILES IN GIT
43
Move a ﬁle or directory.
For example, to move README.md to README.rst, use this:
prompt> git mv README.md README.rst
prompt> git commit -m "Changed README from Markdown to ReSTructured text"
[master f810d86] Changed README from Markdown to ReSTructured text
1 files changed, 0 insertions(+), 0 deletions(-)
rename README.md => README.rst (100%)
Move a ﬁle or directory into another directory.
prompt> git mv README.rst docs/
prompt> git commit -m "Moved README into docs/ directory"
[master 99a0de8] Moved README into docs/ directory
1 files changed, 0 insertions(+), 0 deletions(-)
rename README.rst => docs/README.rst (100%)
Related Tasks
• Task 6, Staging Changes to Commit, on page 34
• Task 7, Committing Changes, on page 36
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

DELETING FILES IN GIT
44
11
Deleting Files in Git
Files and directories sometimes outlive their usefulness. You can remove
them from your working tree and tell Git to quit tracking them using the git
rm command.
This doesn’t remove the ﬁle from your repository’s history; it removes it
only from your working tree going forward. You can always go back in the
history of the repository and see the ﬁles or directories that have been
removed.
You call git rm and provide it with a ﬁlename to tell Git to remove it (or a
standard shell pattern—*.php matches all ﬁles that end in .php). You don’t
have to provide the --, but it’s necessary if you’re trying to remove a ﬁle that
conﬂicts with a command-line option. It tells Git that you’re done providing
options, and everything else is a ﬁle.
You must provide the -r option if you are deleting a directory and all the ﬁles
under it. It tells Git to recursively delete all the ﬁles starting at the provided
directory.
Like most other actions in Git, git rm requires git commit to ﬁnalize its
action. git rm stages the removal, and git commit ﬁnalizes it.
You can undo a git rm before you make a commit through a two-step
process. First, you have to reset the index using git reset HEAD. Be sure to
provide the ﬁlename if you want to leave other staged ﬁles alone. Second,
check out the ﬁle from the repository to restore it using git checkout --
path/to/ﬁle.
git rm attempts to keep you from accidentally deleting a ﬁle that has changes
that have not been committed. You can override this behavior with -f, but be
careful. Forcing Git to delete the ﬁle removes the ﬁle and all traces of the
changes that haven’t been committed yet.
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

DELETING FILES IN GIT
45
Delete a ﬁle from Git.
To delete a ﬁle called outdated.py, use this:
prompt> git rm -- outdated.py
rm 'outdated.py'
prompt> git commit -m "remove outdated.py"
[master 42010bf] remove outdated.py
1 files changed, 0 insertions(+), 17 deletions(-)
delete mode 100644 outdated.py
Delete a directory from Git.
To delete a directory called old/, use this:
prompt> git rm -r -- old/
rm 'old/outdated.py'
prompt> git commit -m "remove the old/ directory"
[master ddbd005] remove the old/ directory
1 files changed, 0 insertions(+), 17 deletions(-)
delete mode 100644 old/outdated.py
Get a directory back after deleting it but before committing it.
This example uses the previous example where old/ is deleted using git rm,
but before the staged deletes are committed. There are two steps. First, reset
the index:
prompt> git reset HEAD -- old/
Unstaged changes after reset:
M
old/outdated.py
Second, check out the ﬁles from the repository:
prompt> git checkout -- old/
Force a ﬁle to be removed.
prompt> git rm -f -- outdated.py
rm 'outdated.py'
Related Tasks
• Task 9, Undoing Uncommitted Changes, on page 40
• Task 10, Moving Files in Git, on page 42
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

SHARING CHANGES
46
12
Sharing Changes
Remember that Git is different from most traditional version control
systems; committing a change and sharing that change are two distinct tasks.
Committing changes is covered in detail in Task 7, Committing Changes, on
page 36; this task gives you a quick cheat sheet for the various tasks you
need to perform to collaborate with others. For more detail on these steps,
see Part IV, Working with a Team.
Once you have a local clone (see Task 4, Creating a Local Copy of an
Existing Repository, on page 26) or have set up a remote after initializing
your repository (see Task 19, Adding and Removing Remotes, on page 70),
you need to fetch changes from the remote repository to keep your local
branches (we’ll cover what branches are in just a second in Part III, Working
with Branches) in sync using git fetch. After fetching changes, you must
merge those changes using any of the methods covered in Part III. Fetching
is covered in more detail in Task 20, Retrieving Remote Changes, on 
page 72.
You can also fetch changes and merge them at the same time using git pull.
It fetches the changes and then merges them into the current branch. You can
specify the --rebase parameter to have Git rebase your local branch on top
of the remote changes (see Task 16, Rewriting History by Rebasing, on 
page 60). Pulling is covered in more detail in Task 21, Retrieving Remote
Changes, Part II, on page 74.
Sending changes back to a remote repository to share is done via the git
push command. Consider it the inverse of git pull; it sends your changes to
the remote repository and merges those changes into the remote branch via a
fast-forward merge, which is a merge where both branches share a common
ancestor and only the branch being merged in has changes in it.
Don’t worry if parts of this sound like Greek. This is a high-level overview
without diving into the speciﬁcs. The next two parts are going to ﬁll in all
the missing pieces.
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

SHARING CHANGES
47
1. Set up the remote repository.
• You clone a repository. Or...
• You add a remote to an existing repository.
2a. Fetch changes from a remote repository.
prompt> git fetch <remote name>
... then merge the changes into your work ...
2b. Pull changes from a remote repository.
prompt> git pull <remote name>
... pull from a repository you cloned ...
prompt> git pull origin
... pull, but rebase your local changes on top
... of the remote change instead of merging them
prompt> git pull --rebase origin <remote branch name>
3. Push changes to a remote repository.
prompt> git push <remote name> <branch name>
Related Tasks
• Task 4, Creating a Local Copy of an Existing Repository, on page 26
• Task 7, Committing Changes, on page 36
• Task 19, Adding and Removing Remotes, on page 70
• Task 20, Retrieving Remote Changes, on page 72
• Task 21, Retrieving Remote Changes, Part II, on page 74
• Task 22, Sending Changes to Remotes, on page 76
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

Part III
Organizing Your Repository with
Branches and Tags

ORGANIZING YOUR REPOSITORY WITH BRANCHES AND TAGS
49
Now that you have the basics down, it’s time to learn about
branches. Branches allow you to segregate different lines of devel-
opment. They’re integral how Git works, so having a good concep-
tual understanding of what they are is crucial to becoming proﬁ-
cient with Git.
Version control systems of yesterday had poor support for branches
and even worse support for merging those branches back together.
Git changes this. In fact, one of the most compelling features of Git
is its ability to easily handle creating branches and gracefully merge
them back together.
Branches track changes to multiple versions of a project. For exam-
ple, you might be ﬁnishing up version 1.0 and already starting on
new features for version 1.1. Using branches, you can keep the code
from version 1.0 isolated so new features from 1.1 don’t accidentally
slip into the version that is getting ready to release.
You give branches names, making it easier track them based on
their name, rather than some commit ID. master is the name of the
default branch that Git uses. All your commits so far in this book
have been in that branch. You can create as many branches as
you want.
Branches in Git are relatively simplistic—they’re simply a text ﬁle in-
side the repository that marks the latest commit in the branch. Treat-
ing branches as pointers makes operations with branches painless
and fast.
There are several different ways to approach using branches. One
approach is the topic branch. You can use this style of branch to
work on a speciﬁc feature, ﬁx a bug, or deal with any other “topic.”
Once it’s complete, then you merge the ﬁnished changes back into
your master branch.
Another common type of branch is the release branch, the type
of branch mentioned earlier. You create release branches as you
approach a release in your project. They’re useful when you or other
members on your team are working on multiple versions of your
project.
You can create a branch called release_v1.0 for the 1.0 version to
isolate that release from features that aren’t supposed to ship until
version 1.1. Work on version 1.1 continues like normal in the mas-
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

ORGANIZING YOUR REPOSITORY WITH BRANCHES AND TAGS
50
ter branch, and any changes from the ﬁnal work on version 1.0 get
merged back into master.
You can use tags to mark milestones in your project, such as re-
leases. Tags are similar to branches, except they are read-only.
Once you create a tag, you can’t change it. Well, that’s almost
true, but for now consider them completely unchangeable.
Branches and tags are not shared by default. Like commits, you’re
given the ability to decide which branches and tags to share with
other developers and when.
Branches in Git are pointers to a speciﬁc commit in your repository’s
history. Since each commit knows about its parent (or parents), Git
can reconstruct what’s in a branch by looking at the latest com-
mit in that branch and walking the history backward to ﬁnd all the
ancestors. This simpliﬁed approach to branches makes them quick
to create, rename, merge, and even delete.
You occasionally have to merge changes between branches to
keep from duplicating the same work in different branches. Git
makes this easy by tracking which commits have been merged be-
tween branches for you. Many modern VCS do not do this at all or
do it poorly.
Git can employ several different merge strategies to merge
branches together. The ﬁrst is the fast-forward merge. Fast-forwards
are performed when two conditions are met: when the branch you
are merging in is being merged back into the branch it was created
from and when the original branch hasn’t had any new commits
since the branch was created. For an example, check out Figure 3,
on the next page.
Fast-forward merges do not actually create anything new in the
repository. They “fast-forward” the branch pointer to the new
location.
Recursive merges are used by default when both the branches
have commits that are not in the other branch. Git creates a merge
commit that has two parent commits—the latest commit in each
branch (see Figure 4, on page 52).
Another way to get information from one branch into another is
through rebasing the branch. Rebasing is a powerful tool in Git that’s
often misunderstood, which is understandable—there’s no corollary
in traditional VCS. It’s best explained with an example workﬂow.
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

ORGANIZING YOUR REPOSITORY WITH BRANCHES AND TAGS
51
Before a Fast-Forward Merge
master
development
After a Fast-Forward Merge
master
development
Figure 3: Before and after a fast-forward merge
Consider the following example.
Rebasing Changes
You start your morning by pulling in all the changes from the
company’s shared repository and then start working. During the
morning, your co-worker pushes some commits upstream. When
you try to push the commits you’ve made, you get an error. You
now have two options. You can fetch the changes and do the
following:
1. Merge them into your local branch, creating a merge
commit.
2. Rebase your local branch on top of the remote branch.
Rebasing takes the commits you made this morning and then
replays them, one by one, starting on the other branch. You can
do this to keep the appearance of a continuous stream of
development instead of having a bunch of merge commits
scattered throughout your repository’s history.
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

ORGANIZING YOUR REPOSITORY WITH BRANCHES AND TAGS
52
Before a Recursive Merge
After a Recursive Merge
master
development
master
development
Figure 4: Before and after a recursive merge
Now, let’s see what’s covered in this part:
• Before you can use branches, you must create them. You
will learn how to do that in Task 13, Creating and Switching
Branches, on page 54.
• Keeping track of your branches requires that you be able to
see what branches you have. Task 14, Viewing Branches, on
page 56 covers the commands you need to know in order to
see the branches you have in your repository.
• Having multiple branches to separate work on your project
into different areas is useful only if you can merge the changes
all back together. You learn this in Task 15, Merging Commits
Between Branches, on page 58.
• No coverage of merging is complete without talking about
rebasing. Rebasing is often misunderstood and feared, so Task
16, Rewriting History by Rebasing, on page 60 gets you com-
fortable with the mechanics of rebasing.
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

ORGANIZING YOUR REPOSITORY WITH BRANCHES AND TAGS
53
• Branches often outlive their intended use. Once you no longer
need a branch, you can then delete it using the methods de-
scribed in Task 17, Deleting Branches, on page 62.
• Finally, you need to be able to mark milestones in your
branches. We cover that in Task 18, Tagging Milestones, on
page 64.
At ﬁrst glance, it might seem odd that branches—generally consid-
ered an advanced topic in most version control systems—are cov-
ered before discussing how to collaborate with a team. There is a
reason for this. Remotes in Git are read-only branches. Once you
know how to work with a branch, you know how to interact with a
remote repository minus a couple of extra commands we’ll cover
when we get there.
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

CREATING AND SWITCHING BRANCHES
54
13
Creating and Switching Branches
Git’s branches enable you to separate experimentation from
production-ready code. Git’s convention is to treat the master branch as its
main line of code. You can rename it to anything you want, but it’s a good
idea to keep with the convention.
You can create a new branch using the git branch command and providing
it at least one additional parameter: the name of the branch you want to
create. This uses your current location in the repository as the place to create
the branch from.
You can also create branches starting at points in the history of the
repository. Provide git branch with the name of the new branch you want to
create followed by the commit ID or branch or tag name to create a branch at
that point.
Following the “do one thing, do it well” idiom, git branch just creates the
branch; you have to switch to it. You can use the git checkout command to
check out the new branch.
Creating a new branch and checking it out immediately is common in Git.
You can do both actions with one command: git checkout -b. Like git
branch, it requires at least one parameter—the name of the new
branch—and takes an optional second parameter specifying the point to
create it from.
Tracking branches store additional metadata information about the
relationship between two branches. The most common tracking branch is a
local branch that tracks a remote branch (something Git does for you by
default). This additional information is used by other commands, such as git
push and git status, to provide additional functionality.
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

CREATING AND SWITCHING BRANCHES
55
Create a new branch from current place in the repository.
prompt> git branch <new branch name>
... example ...
prompt> git branch new
prompt>
Create a new branch from another branch, tag, or commit.
prompt> git branch <new branch name> <starting point>
... example ...
prompt> git branch newer 99a0de8
prompt>
Check out a different branch, tag, and so on.
prompt> git checkout <branch>
... example ...
prompt> git checkout newer
Switched to branch 'newer'
Create a branch and check it out at the same time.
prompt> git checkout -b <new branch> [<starting point>]
... example ...
prompt> git checkout -b newest 64648c9
Switched to branch 'newest'
Create a branch with or without tracking.
Using a remote branch as your <starting point implies that --track is on.
Use --no-track to turn it off.
prompt> git branch --track <new branch> [<starting point>]
prompt> git branch --no-track <new branch> [<starting point>]
prompt>
Related Tasks
• Task 14, Viewing Branches, on the next page
• Task 15, Merging Commits Between Branches, on page 58
• Task 16, Rewriting History by Rebasing, on page 60
• Task 29, Moving Branches, on page 92
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

VIEWING BRANCHES
56
14
Viewing Branches
You need to be able to see what branches your repository has in it so you can
switch between them. You can use a visualization tool such as gitk13 or
GitX.14 You can use git branch to get the same information, however.
You can view local, remote, or all branches depending on which parameters
you pass to git branch. Calling git branch by itself shows you your local
branches. You can add either the -r parameter or the -a parameter to view
only the remote branches or all the branches, respectively.
Your current branch always has an asterisk before it in the output from git
branch. It’s colored green if you turned on color output (see Task 2,
Conﬁguring Git, on page 22). Likewise, remote branches are colored red if
colors are on.
One gotcha with remote branches is that the output from git branch -a
shows their name with a remote/ preﬁx. git branch -r doesn’t. You can use
either name with commands that require a branch name.
It’s useful to see what branches have or have not been merged into the
current branch. You can see that by using the --merged and --no-merged
parameters.
It’s also useful to be able to ﬁnd out which branches contain a particular
commit. For example, you can track which branches contain a commit that
has a known bug in it by using the --contains parameter.
13. Gitk is a cross-platform application written in tcl/tk that ships with Git.
14. A Mac-only clone of Gitk that is designed to be more “Mac-like.” It’s available from
http://gitx.frim.nl/.
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

VIEWING BRANCHES
57
View all local branches.
prompt> git branch
master
new
newer
* newest
View all remote branches.
prompt> git branch -r
origin/master
View all branches.
prompt> git branch -a
master
new
newer
* newest
remotes/origin/master
View all that are or are not merged into the current branch.
prompt> git branch --merged
prompt> git branch --no-merged
View all branches that contain a particular commit.
prompt> git branch --contains <commit id>
Related Tasks
• Task 13, Creating and Switching Branches, on page 54
• Task 15, Merging Commits Between Branches, on the next page
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

MERGING COMMITS BETWEEN BRANCHES
58
15
Merging Commits Between Branches
You have to merge changes from another branch into your current branch in
order to be able to use them. The simplest way to do this is through git
merge.
git merge takes two options: the name of the other branch you want to
merge and the optional local branch you want to merge into. You can leave
off the current branch when you’re merging changes into your current
branch.
By default, git merge commits the merged changes if they can be
successfully merged. You can short-circuit this with the --no-commit
option. This is useful when you want to review, and possibly edit, the
changes from the merge before making a commit.
We touched on how Git attempts to merge commits in the introduction to
Part III. Fast-forward merges are often useful, but sometimes you want to log
that a merge happened. This is common in projects when a big feature that
was developed in a separate branch is merged in; it provides a single commit
you can revert if it needs to be removed in the future. You can do this with
the --no-ff option. It forces Git to create a merge commit, showing that the
two branches were merged.
Another extra you can add when merge commits are created is the --log
option. Traditional merge log messages contain Merge branch
’development’. There are two ways you change this. First, you can add the
--log, which adds the subject line from each commit to the merge commit
message. Or, you can use -m and a message, which lets you specify the
entire message just like git commit.
Git tries to ﬁgure out how to merge all the changes, but sometimes it can’t.
This is called a conﬂict and requires your intervention. Task 24, Handling
Conﬂicts, on page 82 shows you how to handle these cases.
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

MERGING COMMITS BETWEEN BRANCHES
59
Merge changes from development to the master branch.
prompt> git checkout master
Switched to branch 'master'
prompt> git merge development
Updating af0fe21..290b0d2
Fast-forward
old/README.rst |
8 ++------
1 files changed, 2 insertions(+), 6 deletions(-)
Merge changes, but don’t commit.
prompt> git merge --no-commit development
Automatic merge went well; stopped before committing...
Force the creation of a merge commit.
prompt> git merge --no-ff development
Merge made by recursive.
old/README.rst |
8 ++------
1 files changed, 2 insertions(+), 6 deletions(-)
Add a one-line log message from each merged commit to the
merge message.
prompt> git merge --log development
Specify a custom log message for a merge commit, if created.
prompt> git merge -m "my message" development
You can use git commit --amend to modify the commit message after the
fact too. Here’s an example:
prompt> git merge --log --no-ff development
prompt> git commit --amend -c HEAD
... editor launches ...
Related Tasks
• Task 13, Creating and Switching Branches, on page 54
• Task 14, Viewing Branches, on page 56
• Task 16, Rewriting History by Rebasing, on the next page
• Task 21, Retrieving Remote Changes, Part II, on page 74
• Task 24, Handling Conﬂicts, on page 82
• Task 25, Handling Conﬂicts with a GUI, on page 84
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

REWRITING HISTORY BY REBASING
60
16
Rewriting History by Rebasing
Rebasing commits is the one concept in Git that has no counterpart inside
the traditional version control world. Using git rebase, you can rewrite the
history of a repository in a variety of ways. It is one of the most powerful
commands in Git, which makes it one of the most dangerous.
rebase takes a series of commits (normally a branch) and replays them on
top of another commit (normally the last commit in another branch). The
parent commit changes so all the commit IDs are recalculated. This can
cause problems for other developers who have your code because the IDs
don’t match up.
There’s a simple rule of thumb with git rebase: use it as much as you want
on local commits. Once you’ve shared changes with another developer, the
headache is generally not worth the trouble.
git rebase takes a branch (the most common use), a tag, or a commit ID to
rebase on top of. You can also pass the --rebase option to git pull, causing it
to perform a rebase instead of merging the upstream changes into your local
branch.
git rebase requires a clean working tree—that is, a working tree with no
modiﬁed ﬁles. If you have changes that you’re not ready to commit, you can
stash them (see Task 26, Temporarily Hiding Changes, on page 86) until
you’re done.
A conﬂict might arise during the replaying of commits. Like a conﬂict
during a regular merge, a conﬂict happens when two commits modify the
same line of code. git rebase stops when this happens and asks you to ﬁx
the conﬂict (see Task 24, Handling Conﬂicts, on page 82) and then continue.
You tell Git you’re ready with git rebase --continue.
You can also skip a commit that’s causing a conﬂict by calling git rebase
--skip. That could lead to further conﬂicts, however. You can abort the rebase
too with git rebase --abort.
There’s always a safety net if you need to undo a rebase after it’s completed.
Git points ORIG_HEAD at the commit before major changes like git rebase
are run. You can use git reset to reset your repository back to that original
state.
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

REWRITING HISTORY BY REBASING
61
Rebase your current branch against another.
For example, rebase your current branch against master:
prompt> git rebase master
First, rewinding head to replay your work on top of it...
Applying: simple commit
You can also rebase against a tag or commit ID. For example, if af0fe21 is
the commit ID for master, use this:
prompt> git rebase af0fe21
... same as above ...
Undo a rebase after it completes.
prompt> git reset --hard ORIG_HEAD
HEAD is now at e9f9fdc update the README
Using --hard can be dangerous. Check Task 37, Resetting Staged Changes
and Commits, on page 114 for an explanation of its use.
After a Rebase
master
development
master
development
Before a Rebase
Related Tasks
• Task 15, Merging Commits Between Branches, on page 58
• Task 24, Handling Conﬂicts, on page 82
• Task 26, Temporarily Hiding Changes, on page 86
• Task 37, Resetting Staged Changes and Commits, on page 114
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

DELETING BRANCHES
62
17
Deleting Branches
Branches can, and normally do, outlive their usefulness. Once you no longer
need one, you can delete it from your repository. Remember, branches in Git
are pointers to a commit. Deleting a branch doesn’t delete any commits, just
the named pointer that refers to that commit.
One area where Git differs from traditional version control systems is the
expense related to creating and deleting branches. It’s common to leave
branches such as a release branch in the repository indeﬁnitely in
Subversion. Git doesn’t require that.
Since tags and branches both point to a single commit, you can tag your
release and then delete the release branch. You can always create a new
branch from the tag later if you need to make a change and then retag the
new version, and the history will look like the branch had always been there.
You can delete a branch with git branch -d. You must provide the branch
name you want to delete. Git warns you if the branch you are trying to delete
has not been merged into the current branch.
You can override this behavior by using -D (capital D). This tells Git that
you want to delete the branch even if it hasn’t been merged in.
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

DELETING BRANCHES
63
Delete a branch that has been merged into the current branch.
To delete a branch called experiment, do this:
prompt> git branch -d experiment
Deleted branch experiment (was e9f9fdc).
Delete a branch that hasn’t been merged into the current
branch.
prompt> git branch -D experiment
Deleted branch experiment (was e9f9fdc).
Related Tasks
• Task 18, Tagging Milestones, on the following page
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

TAGGING MILESTONES
64
18
Tagging Milestones
You need to make milestones in your projects, each slightly different, such
as for one, its weekly iterations, and for another, its version numbers. You
can use git tag to handle this.
git tag creates a read-only marker within the repository. You can treat tags
like branch names, except you can’t check them out and start committing to
them. You can create a new branch from a tag, however.
Creating a tag requires one parameter: the name of the tag. Nearly every
character you can use as part of a ﬁlename on Unix systems can be used as
part of a tag name. You cannot use the characters ^, *, or :, and a tag cannot
begin or end with /.
You can create a tag from a commit other than HEAD by supplying a second
parameter to git tag. It can be a reference commit (either directly or relative
to another commit) or a branch name (directly or relative as well).
Call git tag without any parameters to list all tags. One key difference
between tags and branches is that there is no difference between a remote tag
and a local tag. A tag is a tag.
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

TAGGING MILESTONES
65
List all tags.
prompt> git tag
v0.1
v0.2
Tag the latest commit as version 1.0 in the current branch.
prompt> git tag v1.0
prompt>
Create a tag called beta1 from the next to last commit.
prompt> git tag beta1 HEAD^
prompt>
Related Tasks
• Task 23, Handling Remote Tags and Branches, on page 78
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

Part IV
Working with a Team

WORKING WITH A TEAM
67
Everything we’ve covered up to this point is about working with Git
on your own. You can use Git like this to track your own projects,
but that doesn’t take full advantage of Git’s power. You need to be
able to collaborate with other developers on your team using Git.
You share code with other developers using remote repositories.
Remote repositories are given names to make them easier to re-
member. For example, the conventional name for your default re-
mote repository is origin.
There are two different ways to share code through a remote reposi-
tory in Git: with a shared repository model or a distributed repository
model. For a visual of these two models, see Figure 5, on the follow-
ing page. The one most familiar to those coming from another VCS
is the shared repository model.
A shared repository means that all members of your team can push
and pull from the same repository. Team members keep their
changes locally until they’re ready; then they push those changes
back upstream when they’re complete for the rest of the team to
use.
This model is very familiar to anyone used to working with a tradi-
tional version control system. There’s very little overhead in deter-
mining where the code is and what state everything is in.
You can also use a distributed repository model for handling your
repositories. Each member of your team has their own private repos-
itories on their computers plus a public repository that they push
their code to. Each team member needs to pull changes from the
other team members to make sure they have the latest code.
Most teams using a distributed model designate someone as the
release manager. It becomes their job to make sure that everything
is merged together, and that member’s public repository becomes
the repository of record. This is also common in open source projects
using Git.
Many teams see the most beneﬁt from a hybrid of these two ap-
proaches. One repository is considered the repository of record that
everyone syncs against, and then developers share their changes
through their public repositories. Once changes are ready to be-
come part of the ofﬁcial version, they get pushed to the ofﬁcial
repository.
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

WORKING WITH A TEAM
68
  ou
Bob
Alice
Shared
Repository
You
Bob
Alice
Push
Pull
Distributed
Repositories
Figure 5: Shared and distributed repository layout with three developers. Gray
circles are the private repositories; outlined circles are public repositories.
In addition to the concept of remotes, these tasks introduce two
new concepts you use to retrieve and send changes to remote
repositories:
• Fetching, or retrieving changes from a remote repository, cov-
ered in Task 20, Retrieving Remote Changes, on page 72
• Pushing, or sending changes to a remote repository, discussed
in Task 22, Sending Changes to Remotes, on page 76
You might wonder where pulling ﬁts into this. The only difference
between a pull (see Task 21, Retrieving Remote Changes, Part II, on
page 74) and a fetch (see Task 20, Retrieving Remote Changes, on
page 72) is that pulling merges changes after Git fetches them. It’s
a shorthand way to combine fetching and merging into one com-
mand.
All of these changes being retrieved from remote repositories are
stored inside your local repository in remote branches. Git treats
remote repositories—often called just remotes—as branches. All of
the commits from the remotes are stored alongside your commits in
the repository, and special remote branches track which commits
have branches pointing to them.
You can treat remote branches like normal branches with one ex-
ception: you can’t commit to them. That means you can merge or
cherry-pick commits from them into your local branches or rebase
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

WORKING WITH A TEAM
69
your local branches on top of remote branches. The only way to
get commits into a remote branch is to push those changes to the
remote.
Covered in this part:
• First you need to know how to handle remote repositories. You
learn that in Task 19, Adding and Removing Remotes, on the
next page.
• Next up is fetching changes from remote repositories, which
you learn about in Task 20, Retrieving Remote Changes, on
page 72.
• After you know how to fetch changes, we go over the short-
hand command for fetching and merging changes at the
same time in Task 21, Retrieving Remote Changes, Part II, on
page 74.
• Grabbing changes from other developers is only half the pro-
cess. You need to be able to send your changes back out into
the world. Task 22, Sending Changes to Remotes, on page 76
shows you how.
• We’ve already talked about tags and branches locally. You
learn about remote tags in Task 23, Handling Remote Tags and
Branches, on page 78.
Before you start concerning yourself with pushing and pulling, how-
ever, you need to add a remote repository to communicate with.
Let’s cover that next.
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

ADDING AND REMOVING REMOTES
70
19
Adding and Removing Remotes
Git allows you to have as many remote repositories as you like. It’s common
to have a different remote for each member of your team in a fully
distributed architecture for your repositories. Git requires that each remote
have a unique name.
You must tell Git where to access remote repositories. You do this using the
git remote add command.15 It requires two parameters: a name and a
repository URL.
The ﬁrst is simply the short name you use to reference the remote repository
by. The name origin is the conventional name for the repository that you
clone from. Git uses this convention in several commands that allow you to
skip the remote name when you’re working with the origin repository.
The repository URL points to the actual location of the remote repository.
This can be in another directory on your system or, more commonly, a
repository that is accessible via a network connection. Git can transfer over
its own git protocol, over git using SSH to encrypt the data transfer and
handle authentication, and over HTTP/HTTPS.
Git sets up tracking branches for you whenever you create a local branch
from a remote branch. Adding a repository after you start working locally,
though, doesn’t give Git a chance to do that setup. You can add this by
removing the local branch and re-creating it from the remote branch. Don’t
worry—as long as you make sure all the changes in your local branch have
been pushed to your remote repository and your local and remote branch
have the same things in them, you aren’t going to lose any commits.
You can remove remote repositories by using the git remote rm command.
It removes any tracking branch information in addition to removing the
remote deﬁnition.
15. Most commands that require a remote repository take both remote names—what you add with
git remote add—or the repository URL.
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

ADDING AND REMOVING REMOTES
71
Add a new remote repository.
prompt> git remote add <name> <repository URL>
... example ...
prompt> git remote add tswicegood \
git://github.com/tswicegood/bobby-tables.git
propmt>
Remove a remote.
prompt> git remote rm <name>
... example ...
prompt> git remote rm tswicegood
Make the master branch a tracking branch.
Run these commands after you push to your remote repository for the ﬁrst
time if you want to set up your local branch as a tracking branch of the
remote. As an example, here’s the workﬂow in a project of mine:
prompt> git checkout origin/master
Note: checking out 'origin/master'.
You are in 'detached HEAD' state. ... and so on ...
git checkout -b new_branch_name
HEAD is now at d7c8880... ignore stuff from virtualenv
prompt> git branch -d master
Deleted branch master (was d7c8880).
prompt> git checkout -b master
Switched to a new branch 'master'
Related Tasks
• Task 4, Creating a Local Copy of an Existing Repository, on page 26
• Task 13, Creating and Switching Branches, on page 54
• Task 20, Retrieving Remote Changes, on the following page
• Task 21, Retrieving Remote Changes, Part II, on page 74
• Task 22, Sending Changes to Remotes, on page 76
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

RETRIEVING REMOTE CHANGES
72
20
Retrieving Remote Changes
You must keep your repository in sync with the changes from everyone else
that is collaborating on it with you. You do this with the git fetch command.
Fetching is closely related to git pull, and many people incorrectly use the
two commands interchangeably.
Fetching changes from a remote repository retrieves—literally fetches—the
changes from that remote repository. This stores them in their remote
branches on your local repository. You can use this to see what changes are
on the remote repository without affecting your local repository.
Git fetches the changes from the origin remote repository if you don’t
specify a remote. You can fetch from another repository by providing the
name of that remote repository. By default, it fetches all branches from a
remote repository. You can change this depending on the parameters you
provide to git fetch.
You can fetch a speciﬁc branch by calling git fetch with an explicit remote
name and a refspec. Refspecs provide the name of the remote branch and the
branch in your local repository that it should be fetched into separated by a
colon. For example, to fetch only the master branch from your origin
branch, you use this: git fetch origin master:remotes/origin/master.
This format might look a little wonky at ﬁrst glance. Most of the time you
refer to a remote branch by <remote name>/<branch name> without the
remotes/ preﬁx. Its full name contains the remote/ preﬁx, however, and
you must use its full name with this command.
You can fetch changes from multiple remotes at one time. You can use the
--multiple parameter to provide Git with multiple remotes to fetch changes
from. Use --all to tell Git to go through all of your remotes and fetch the
changes from them.
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

RETRIEVING REMOTE CHANGES
73
Fetch changes from remote repository.
prompt> git fetch <remote name>
... example ...
prompt> git fetch tswicegood
remote: Counting objects: 39, done.
remote: Compressing objects: 100% (25/25), done.
remote: Total 39 (delta 16), reused 26 (delta 9)
Unpacking objects: 100% (39/39), done.
From git://github.com/tswicegood/bobby-tables
* [new branch]
master
-> tswicegood/master
Fetch a speciﬁc branch.
This requires a peculiar refspec to make sure the fetched branch ends up in
the right place in your local repository.
prompt> git fetch remote
\
local branch:remotes/remote/remote branch
To fetch master from origin to your local copy of the origin/master remote
branch, use this:
prompt> git fetch origin master:remotes/origin/master
Fetch changes from multiple remote repositories.
prompt> git fetch --multiple remote1 remote2 ... and so on ...
Fetch changes from all remote repositories.
prompt> git fetch --all
... example after adding another remote ...
prompt> git fetch --all
Fetching tswicegood
Fetching petdance
remote: Counting objects: 414, done.
remote: Compressing objects: 100% (161/161), done.
remote: Total 407 (delta 231), reused 397 (delta 227)
Receiving objects: 100% (407/407), 52.53 KiB, done.
Resolving deltas: 100% (231/231), completed with 2 local objects.
From http://github.com/petdance/bobby-tables
* [new branch]
master
-> petdance/master
Related Tasks
• Task 4, Creating a Local Copy of an Existing Repository, on page 26
• Task 19, Adding and Removing Remotes, on page 70
• Task 21, Retrieving Remote Changes, Part II, on the next page
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

RETRIEVING REMOTE CHANGES, PART II
74
21
Retrieving Remote Changes, Part II
Many people new to Git treat git fetch and git pull as synonyms.
Understanding the differences between the two is important to understanding
how Git handles remote repositories. Remember, remotes are read-only
branches. You fetch changes from a remote repository into those branches
(which are stored locally), instead of committing directly to them, and then
merge those changes as necessary. You can use git pull to combine fetching
and merging into one command.
git pull follows Git’s convention and assumes that you want to pull from the
origin remote repository if you do not specify a remote. You must specify a
remote if you want to provide a speciﬁc branch to pull from.
You can provide a full refspec—two branches separated by a colon—to
control which branch you are pulling from and which branch you want those
changes to end up in. You specify the remote branch before the colon and the
local branch after the colon. You can pull into branches that don’t exist.
You can use the --rebase option to tell Git to rebase your local changes on
top of the remote changes instead of performing a merge. This is the
equivalent of running git fetch followed by git rebase. This allows you to
cleanly apply all your local changes on top of the remote changes that have
already been shared.
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

RETRIEVING REMOTE CHANGES, PART II
75
Pull changes from a remote repository.
prompt> git pull [name [branch name]]
... example ...
prompt> git pull tswicegood master
From git://github.com/tswicegood/bobby-tables
* branch
master
-> FETCH_HEAD
Pull changes from a different branch into your local branch.
prompt> git pull origin <remote branch>:<local branch>
... example ...
prompt> git pull origin development:team-dev
Pull changes and rebase instead of merge.
To fetch from origin and rebase against its main branch, use this:
prompt> git pull --rebase origin master
From git://github.com/origin/bobby-tables
* branch
master
-> FETCH_HEAD
First, rewinding head to replay your work on top of it...
Applying: add <meta> tags
Related Tasks
• Task 15, Merging Commits Between Branches, on page 58
• Task 16, Rewriting History by Rebasing, on page 60
• Task 19, Adding and Removing Remotes, on page 70
• Task 20, Retrieving Remote Changes, on page 72
• Task 22, Sending Changes to Remotes, on the following page
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

SENDING CHANGES TO REMOTES
76
22
Sending Changes to Remotes
You have to publish your repository somewhere that is accessible to other
members of your team. You send your changes to that repository using the
git push command.
Calling git push without any parameters causes Git to assume you want to
push the current local branch to a branch of the same name on the origin
repository. You can provide both a remote repository and a branch name.
git push takes both named remote repositories (that is, those that have been
added via git remote add) and full URLs to remote repositories.
You can provide a branch name to specify which branch to push, but in order
to provide a branch, you must specify a remote repository. For example, to
push your beta branch to your origin repository, you would use this: git
push origin beta.
You can also use the more verbose refspec syntax if you want to push to a
remote branch that is named differently than your local branch. The syntax
of a refspec for git push is two branches separated by a colon—the local
branch ﬁrst followed by the name of the remote branch. For example,
pushing your local master branch to a remote branch named beta, you use
this: git push origin master:beta.
Git attempts to keep you from updating a repository in a way that could
cause issues for others who have cloned your repository. By default, it does
not allow you to push non-fast-forward changes to a remote repository (see
introduction to Part III, Organizing Your Repository with Branches and Tags,
for more information on types of merges).
Non-fast-forward merges are generally caused by one of two things: 1)
someone else has pushed changes to the remote repository; or 2) you’ve
made a modiﬁcation to your local repository history. For the ﬁrst case, fetch
the remote changes, and then merge them into your local branch (via git
rebase or git merge). The second case could be caused by a rebase,
amending commits, or resetting the repository.
You normally don’t want to update a remote repository without using a
fast-forward push, but in those rare cases where it is necessary or desired
(you committed sensitive information or are removing a commit that does
not need to be recorded, for example), you can use the --force or -f option to
force Git to allow the update.
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

SENDING CHANGES TO REMOTES
77
Push the local tracking branch to your origin.
prompt> git push
Push ﬁrst set of changes from master to your origin.
prompt> git push origin master
Push changes from a speciﬁc branch to a speciﬁc remote
repository.
prompt> git push <remote name> <branch name>
... example ...
prompt> git push tswicegood development
Counting objects: 42, done.
Delta compression using up to 2 threads.
Compressing objects: 100% (33/33), done.
Writing objects: 100% (42/42), 39.49 KiB, done.
Total 42 (delta 18), reused 5 (delta 4)
Unpacking objects: 100% (42/42), done.
To git://internal.domain51.pvt/sample-repo.git
* [new branch]
development -> development
For example, to push to the production branch to the shared remote, use
this:
prompt> git push shared production
Push changes from the local master branch to the remote
production branch.
prompt> git push origin master:production
Force a remote branch to accept a push.
Warning: Use this with extreme caution because it can cause others to get
out of sync with the repository to which you are pushing.
prompt> git push --force
... or ...
prompt> git push -f
Related Tasks
• Task 4, Creating a Local Copy of an Existing Repository, on page 26
• Task 15, Merging Commits Between Branches, on page 58
• Task 19, Adding and Removing Remotes, on page 70
• Task 21, Retrieving Remote Changes, Part II, on page 74
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

HANDLING REMOTE TAGS AND BRANCHES
78
23
Handling Remote Tags and Branches
You can push your tags to a remote repository by one of two mechanisms:
you can call git push and supply the tag name as the reference to push, or
you can add the --tags parameter to git push to push all your tags to the
remote.
Most tags are fetched automatically. Fetching changes from master that has
several tags in its history causes Git to fetch those tags as well. Like git push
--tags, you can explicitly fetch tags via git fetch --tags.
Be careful with tags, however. Remote tags always win when there are two
tags with the same name. For example, you have a repository that points to
v1.0, and your remote repository has a v1.0 that points to a different commit.
When you pull changes from that remote, your v1.0 is going to change to
reﬂect the latest.
The best way to handle this is through procedure. Determine who is
responsible on your team for tagging commits and the way you’re going to
name tags,16 and stick to it.
You have to explicitly push a branch to get a local branch to show up on a
remote repository. Likewise, you have to explicitly delete remote branches to
remove them.
You can delete remote branches with a special-case refspec and git push:
:<branch to delete>. This is the equivalent of pushing an empty branch to
the remote repository.
16. Semantic Versioning (http://semver.org/) is a great place to start.
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

HANDLING REMOTE TAGS AND BRANCHES
79
Push tag v1.0 to the origin.
prompt> git push origin v1.0
Total 0 (delta 0), reused 0 (delta 0)
To git://internal.domain51.pvt/sample-repo.git
* [new tag]
v1.0 -> v1.0
Push all tags to the origin.
prompt> git push --tags origin
Total 0 (delta 0), reused 0 (delta 0)
To git://internal.domain51.pvt/sample-repo.git
* [new tag]
v0.8 -> v0.8
* [new tag]
v0.9 -> v0.9
Fetch remote tags and update local tags.
prompt> git fetch --tags origin
remote: Counting objects: 42, done.
remote: Compressing objects: 100% (37/37), done.
remote: Total 42 (delta 18), reused 0 (delta 0)
Unpacking objects: 100% (42/42), done.
From git://internal.domain51.pvt/sample-repo.git
* [new tag]
v0.8
-> v0.8
* [new tag]
v0.9
-> v0.9
* [new tag]
v1.0
-> v1.0
Delete the remote branch called beta.
prompt> git push origin :beta
From git://internal.domain51.pvt/sample-repo.git
- [deleted]
beta
Related Tasks
• Task 18, Tagging Milestones, on page 64
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

Part V
Branches and Merging Revisited

BRANCHES AND MERGING REVISITED
81
Now you have the basics down, understand the concepts of
branches, and have the know-how to collaborate with other devel-
opers. It’s time to revisit branches and some of the more advanced
things you can do with them.
For basic branch usage, see Part III, Organizing Your Repository with
Branches and Tags. This part covers tasks related to managing
branches once they’ve been created. For example, what happens
when you edit the same ﬁle in different ways in two branches and
then attempt to merge them back together? A conﬂict can occur.
We cover multiple ways to handle that in this part.
Covered in this part:
• Conﬂicts are going to happen. Git tries to ﬁgure out how to
handle merging changes as best it can, but sometimes it
can’t. Task 24, Handling Conﬂicts, on the following page, cov-
ers how to ﬁx cases where a conﬂict is created.
• You can also use a GUI tool for managing conﬂicts. Task 25,
Handling Conﬂicts with a GUI, on page 84, covers that.
• Sometimes you need to temporarily hide changes in your
working tree. We see how you do this in Task 26, Temporarily
Hiding Changes, on page 86.
• There’s more than one way to get changes between
branches. Task 27, Cherry-Picking Commits, on page 88, intro-
duces you to another way to pull individual changes from one
branch into another.
• We revisit the git rebase command in Task 28, Controlling How
You Replay Commits, on page 90, to learn how to use rebase
interactively.
• You can move branches around. There are several ways to do
this, depending on the circumstance. Look at Task 29, Moving
Branches, on page 92, to see how.
Now, let’s brush up on our conﬂict resolution skills.
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

HANDLING CONFLICTS
82
24
Handling Conﬂicts
You can’t develop a project with other developers without generating
conﬂicting versions of code from time to time. Git goes a long way toward
helping you resolve those automatically, but sometimes it can’t.
For example, the code shown on the opposite page shows two different
solutions to the same problem. You must tell Git how to ﬁx the conﬂict
because it doesn’t know which version is correct. They both make changes
to the exact same lines of code. You can ﬁnd out which ﬁle or ﬁles have
conﬂicts in two ways: the output from the failed git merge, or git status.
You can ﬁnd conﬂicts within a ﬁle by looking for <<<<<<<—seven lesser
than signs—with a commit such as HEAD. The original code—the code
inside the branch you’re merging into—is located between the 7 < and
========. The new code is between that marker and >>>>>>>, followed by
the name of branch (or commit ID, tag, and so on) you were merging in.
How you deal with the conﬂict and determine which version to use is up to
you. You can choose one version over the other, use one and then the other,
combine the two changes together, or completely remove them both.
Once you’ve resolved the conﬂict, call git add to stage the new changes and
then git commit to commit it. You might not have anything to commit,
however. For example, if you use all the changes from your local branch, Git
doesn’t need to create a new commit. Nothing has changed.
You can also abort a conﬂict at any time before you commit the changes by
resetting your working tree to ORIG_HEAD. See Task 37, Resetting Staged
Changes and Commits, on page 114 for more information on git reset.
Here’s an example of how a conﬂict can happen between two branches:
Conﬂict
Both commits change the same line of code
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

HANDLING CONFLICTS
83
See an example merge conﬂict.
The basics of the error message are the same, but the ﬁles are always
different. For example, here’s a conﬂict in a repository for one of my
projects:
prompt> git merge added_raw
Auto-merging dolt.py
CONFLICT (content): Merge conflict in dolt.py
Automatic merge failed; fix conflicts and then commit the result.
You can ﬁnd the conﬂict inside the ﬁle by looking for the special markup
that Git adds, <<<<<<< followed by a commit (most of the time HEAD.
Here’s the conﬂict in the previous ﬁle:
<<<<<<< HEAD
def _handle_response(self, response, data=[], raw=False):
return data if raw else simplejson.loads(data)
=======
def _handle_response(self, response, raw=False, data=[]):
if raw:
return data
return simplejson.loads(data)
>>>>>>> added_raw
Commit a ﬁxed conﬂict.
You can use git status to see whether the conﬂict still exists:
# On branch master
# Unmerged paths:
#
(use "git add/rm <file>..." as appropriate to mark resolution)
#
#
both modified:
dolt.py
#
Once the conﬂict is resolved, call git add and git commit like you normally
would.
Related Tasks
• Task 15, Merging Commits Between Branches, on page 58
• Task 25, Handling Conﬂicts with a GUI, on the following page
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

HANDLING CONFLICTS WITH A GUI
84
25
Handling Conﬂicts with a GUI
Merging is often made easier with a GUI that displays each version of the
code in question and allows you to choose which version you prefer. You can
use git mergetool to launch a GUI tool to handle merge conﬂicts.
You can choose from several different merge tools. Their availability varies
between platforms, and how you interact with a tool is slightly different for
each one you use for merging. Generally, the local copy (the original that
was in your branch before the merge) is displayed on the left, with the
remote, new code on the right.
Common to all GUI merge tools is the ability to step through each change
and choose which version you like. You must save those changes before
exiting. git mergetool looks at the result and stages that as the correct
version of the conﬂicting code.
You have to commit your changes once the conﬂict has been resolved, just
like manually merging the conﬂicts (see Task 24, Handling Conﬂicts, on
page 82). git mergetool stages the changes for you; that’s the only
difference.
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

HANDLING CONFLICTS WITH A GUI
85
Launch a merge tool to handle a conﬂict.
prompt> git mergetool
merge tool candidates: opendiff kdiff3 tkdiff xxdiff meld
tortoisemerge gvimdiff diffuse ecmerge p4merge araxis emerge vimdiff
Merging the files: dolt.py
Normal merge conflict for 'dolt.py':
{local}: modified
{remote}: modified
Hit return to start merge resolution tool (opendiff):
Set gvimdiff as the default merge tool.
prompt> git config --global merge.tool "gvimdiff"
Use the Perforce Visual Merge Tool17 on Windows.
This example shows the Window-speciﬁc command, but you can use the
same process on any platform for a custom merge tool.
prompt> git config --global merge.tool p4merge
prompt> git config --global mergetool.p4merge.cmd \
'p4merge.exe \"$BASE\" \"$LOCAL\" \"$REMOTE\" \"$MERGED\"'
Related Tasks
• Task 15, Merging Commits Between Branches, on page 58
• Task 24, Handling Conﬂicts, on page 82
17. http://www.perforce.com/perforce/products/merge.html
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

TEMPORARILY HIDING CHANGES
86
26
Temporarily Hiding Changes
Some Git operations, such as git rebase, require a clean working tree—a
working tree with no changes. git stash gives you a tool to hide changes that
aren’t quite ready to commit so you can come back to them.
Stashing changes is the equivalent of creating a commit and then resetting
your repository back one commit. Stash provides a mechanism for grabbing
those changes out of history more easily, however.
Stash names are similar to the names you see in the reﬂog (see Task 40,
Retrieving “Lost” Commits, on page 120). You refer to them as stash@{#},
replacing the # with the age of the stash. The most recent is 0, the one before
that is 1, and so on.
You can call git stash without any parameters to create a new stash. Calling
it without any parameters is the same as calling it with git stash save.
Providing the save option allows you to specify a message explaining what
the stash was.
There are two commands to apply previous stashes to your current working
tree: apply and pop. You can use apply to make the change to your
working tree without removing the stashed change from your stash. Most of
the time, you want to apply it and remove it from the stash, though. That’s
where pop comes in. It “pops” the change off the stack and applies it.
Creating stashes stores the commits outside of normal branches. To see what
stashed changes are available, you can use the git stash list command. Like
the name hints at, it lists all the stashed changes.
You can use the --patch parameter to stash a portion of the change. It works
just like git add -p (see Task 6, Staging Changes to Commit, on page 34).
Sometimes you create a stash and then realize you don’t need it any longer.
You can use git stash drop <stash name> to delete an individual stash, or
you can use the clear option to remove all the stashed changes.
Another interesting use of git stash is the branch option. You can use it to
create a new branch from a stash. Git creates a new branch for you that looks
exactly like your repository did when you called git stash originally. This is
useful for applying a stash to see its changes in situations where the stash
does not apply cleanly to the current working tree.
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

TEMPORARILY HIDING CHANGES
87
Stash the changes in your working tree.
prompt> git stash
Saved working directory and index state WIP on
master: 8e323b6 add <meta> tags
HEAD is now at 8e323b6 add <meta> tags
Apply a stash to the current working tree.
prompt> git stash apply
... output looks similar to git status after apply ...
Or, to apply and remove from the stash, use this:
prompt> git stash pop
... same output as above plus ...
Dropped refs/stash@{0} (76d9092...)
List the available stashes.
prompt> git stash list
stash@{0}: WIP on master: 8e323b6 add <meta> tags
Create a stash in patch mode.
prompt> git stash save --patch
... launches editor ...
Delete stashes.
prompt> git stash drop <stash name>
Dropped stash@{0} (ea5bd0c...)
Or, to remove all stashed changes, use this:
prompt> git stash clear
prompt>
Create a branch from an existing stash.
prompt> git stash branch [<stash name>]
Related Tasks
• Task 6, Staging Changes to Commit, on page 34
• Task 7, Committing Changes, on page 36
• Task 13, Creating and Switching Branches, on page 54
• Task 16, Rewriting History by Rebasing, on page 60
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

CHERRY-PICKING COMMITS
88
27
Cherry-Picking Commits
You sometimes need to grab one commit from another branch and merge it
into your local branch, such as a bug ﬁx that needs to be backported. You
can grab commits one at a time using git cherry-pick.
Cherry-picking a commit from another takes that single commit and
commits it to your local branch. It’s pretty straightforward and appears
extremely useful in a lot of situations, but be careful.
Cherry-picked commits have different commit IDs than the original commit
they came from because their parent changed—remember that a commit ID
is based partially on where it exists in the history, and changing the parent
changes the commit ID. A good rule of thumb is to cherry-pick commits
only when a merge is not an option, in other words, backporting a bug ﬁx
where the backported change is never going to be merged forward.
You must specify the commit that you want to cherry-pick. You can do this
with either a commit ID, a branch name, a tag, or some relative reference to
any of these. Keep in mind that using a branch name or tag means that the
latest commit that those reference is cherry-picked in, not the entire history.
Normally git cherry-pick automatically creates a new commit as soon as it
is done. You can change this behavior with two different options. Use --edit
(or -e) to launch the editor and change the commit message before
committing the cherry-picked revision. This allows you to edit the commit
message but not the actual commit.
You can use --no-commit (or -n) to tell Git to stop as soon as the change has
been merged and staged. You can use this to cherry-pick several commits
and then commit them into your local branch as one commit. Remember to
start with the oldest commit ﬁrst when cherry-picking more than one
commit; otherwise, you might end up trying to make a change that isn’t
possible or having conﬂicts because it is in the wrong order.
You can also add a Signed-off-by line to the end of a cherry-picked commit.
Signed-off lines consist of the phrase Signed-off-by: followed by your name
and email address (pulled from the conﬁguration). This is useful for creating
a chain of review for commits and can become essential in backported
commits to ensure they have been properly reviewed prior to being merged
into an existing branch.
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

CHERRY-PICKING COMMITS
89
Merge a single commit from another branch into your local
one.
prompt> git cherry-pick some commit ID
some commit ID refers to a commit any way you normally can: an actual
commit ID, branch name, tag, or some relative version of any of those. For
example, to cherry-pick the latest from release_1.0 or commit a74cc83,
use this:
prompt> git cherry-pick release_1.0
Finished one cherry-pick.
[master bcdbca8] add <meta> tags
1 files changed, 1 insertions(+), 0 deletions(-)
prompt> git cherry-pick a74cc83
Finished one cherry-pick.
[master dd94f18] working on conerting to Textile
Author: Andy Lester <andy@petdance.com>
5 files changed, 195 insertions(+), 176 deletions(-)
rewrite crank (81%)
create mode 100644 s/index.textile
create mode 100644 s/java.textile
Cherry-pick, but edit the commit message before committing.
prompt> git cherry-pick --edit release_1.0
... or ...
prompt> git cherry-pick -e release_1.0
Cherry-pick, but don’t commit.
prompt> git cherry-pick --no-commit release_1.0
... or ...
prompt> git cherry-pick -n release_1.0
Add a “Signed-off-by” line to the commit message.
prompt> git cherry-pick --signoff release_1.0
... or ...
prompt> git cherry-pick -s release_1.0
Related Tasks
• Task 7, Committing Changes, on page 36
• Task 15, Merging Commits Between Branches, on page 58
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

CONTROLLING HOW YOU REPLAY COMMITS
90
28
Controlling How You Replay Commits
Rebasing in Git replays one set of commits on top of another. We covered
the basic case in Task 16, Rewriting History by Rebasing, on page 60. There
is an interactive mode to git rebase that lets you control how the commits
are replayed.
Like a regular rebase, git rebase -i takes the commits in your current branch
and replays them against another point in your repository’s history. You can
use this to change the order of commits, squash commits together, or edit a
previous commit. Consider the following example.
You add a new feature and then start working on the next feature. You realize
a little while later that you could have implemented it in a cleaner fashion.
You could amend the commit (see Task 35, Fixing Commits, on page 110) if
it’s the last commit, but since some time has elapsed, you’ve already created
other commits.
This is where interactive rebasing comes into play. Create the second
commit with the ﬁx you want to use, and then launch git rebase -i and pass
it the commit ID of the original commit ID minus one. For example, if the
commit ID was 322dafc, you should use git rebase -i 322dafc^.
Git rebase’s interactive mode launches your editor with a list of commits.
You can use the editor to move the last line (the commit you just made) up to
immediately after the commit you want to merge it into; then change the ﬁrst
word to say ﬁxup to merge it into the original commit.
There ﬁve different options: pick, reword, edit, squash, and ﬁxup. You can
use any of these as the ﬁrst word or the ﬁrst letter of a line to adjust that
commit when it is replayed.
Like a regular git rebase, be careful how you rebase. You can cause issues
for other people who have synced off of your repository if you rebase code
that you’ve already shared. Remember this simple rule of thumb: don’t
rebase code you’ve shared.
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

CONTROLLING HOW YOU REPLAY COMMITS
91
Rebase interactively.
prompt> git rebase -i &lt;commit ID
... example ...
prompt> git rebase -i HEAD~5
For example, to interactively rebase the last ﬁve commits, use this:
prompt> git rebase -i HEAD~5
... or ...
prompt> git rebase -i HEAD^^^^^
See an example interactive rebase.
The following is the result of a git rebase -i on one of my projects:
pick 6b24857 remove theme from repo
pick 29e2376 add in dependency on external repo for theme
pick 7ce4bdf add code to handle deployment of new docs
# Rebase 86968d5..7ce4bdf onto 86968d5
#
# Commands:
#
p, pick = use commit
#
r, reword = use commit, but edit the commit message
#
e, edit = use commit, but stop for amending
#
s, squash = use commit, but meld into previous commit
#
f, fixup = like "squash", but discard this commit's log message
#
# If you remove a line here THAT COMMIT WILL BE LOST.
# However, if you remove everything, the rebase will be aborted.
#
Related Tasks
• Task 15, Merging Commits Between Branches, on page 58
• Task 16, Rewriting History by Rebasing, on page 60
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

MOVING BRANCHES
92
29
Moving Branches
Sometimes you need to move branches around to reorganize them. For
example, you have a branch where you’re working on a future version of
your software. During the rewrite, your team realizes that the better-widget
feature can be released as a minor version of your software instead of being
part of the next major version. This is where you can move a branch to make
your repository more sane.
You use git rebase --onto to move branches. Like a normal git rebase, Git
replays the commits from one branch against another. The difference is that
Git takes the branch you’re rebasing, and instead of replaying it against
another branch, it moves it to an entirely different one.
The syntax is more verbose than a simple git rebase that requires only one
additional parameter. git rebase --onto takes three: the ﬁrst is the branch
you’re rebasing onto, the second is the branch you’re rebasing from, and the
third is the branch you want to move.
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

MOVING BRANCHES
93
Move branch better-widget from next-release to master.
This is the current state of the repository: the next-release branch was
created from the master branch, and the better-widget branch was created
from the next-release branch.
o--master--o
\
o--next-release--o
\
o--better-widget--o
The command to move the branch is a specialized version of git rebase:
prompt> git rebase --onto master next-release better-widget
After running this command, use this:
o--better-widget--o
/
o--master--o
\
o--next-release--o
next-release is moved to the end of master, so if there were more commits
in master than were in next-release, better-widget is placed on top of
those. Here’s an example:
o--master--o--o--o
\
o--next-release--o
\
o--better-widget--o
After running git rebase --onto, use this:
o--better-widget--o
/
o--master--o--o--o
\
o--next-release--o
Related Tasks
• Task 16, Rewriting History by Rebasing, on page 60
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

Part VI
Working with the Repository’s
History

WORKING WITH THE REPOSITORY’S HISTORY
95
You’ve learned all the basics, as well as some of the more complex
topics in Git. It’s time to start looking at all that history you’ve been
building up and put the code in the context it was created in.
Your repository is a vault of all the changes you and your team have
made to your project. Git tracks all of those changes and their com-
mit messages, making them viewable and searchable via the log.
The log is a reverse chronological view of each commit. By default,
it shows you the commit ID, the author, the committer (if that person
is different from the author), the date, and the log message. You
can show more (or less) in that output.
The power of Git’s log feature is directly related to how your project
handles commit messages. The more information you add to your
commit message, the more valuable the log is to your developers.
Git convention for commit messages is to break the messages into
two parts. Start with a one-line “subject” that tersely describes the
change that was made, and then follow it with a more in-depth
“body” that describes the change in plain text. The rule of thumb is
to explain the change like you’re explaining it to another developer.
Let the code speak for itself, but make sure to include reasons for the
change and explain any potentially odd choices.
Covered in this part:
• We start with the log in Task 30, Viewing the Log, on page 98.
You’ll learn how to view the log in a couple of different formats
and how to understand the information it displays.
• Once you understand the basics of querying Git’s log, Task
31, Filtering the Log Output, on page 100 walks you through
ﬁltering those results through Git’s revisions and ranges.
• Each commit tracks changes between ﬁles. Those changes
are described as diffs. You’ll learn how to view Git’s diffs in
Task 32, Comparing Differences, on page 102 so you can see
changes across different commits.
• Everyone loves statistics. Well, at least managers do. In addi-
tion to the excellent diffs and logs that Git provides, it also
gives you the ability to generate some statistics on the
changes your repository is tracking. You’ll learn how to use
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

WORKING WITH THE REPOSITORY’S HISTORY
96
these tools in Task 33, Generating Statistics About Changes,
on page 104.
• Finally, we wrap up this part with a section on blame. The logs
provide us with excellent information on individual changes. In
Task 34, Assigning Blame, on page 106, you learn how inspect
information about each line of a ﬁle. It’s excellent for assigning
blame—er, praise—on the other members of your team when
you ﬁnd their excellently unique code.
Now, let’s jump into the basic display of your repository’s history: the
log.
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

WORKING WITH THE REPOSITORY’S HISTORY
97
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

VIEWING THE LOG
98
30
Viewing the Log
Git’s bread and butter is tracking changes to ﬁles in your project over a
period of time. You use the log to view that history.
You can use git log to view the standard log output. Git displays the commit
ID, author, date, and commit message for each commit in reverse
chronological order. Git sends the output through less to keep the output
from scrolling past on the screen too fast to be seen.
You can use the --oneline parameter to shorten the log display to show the
ﬁrst seven characters of the commit ID and the subject of the log message. It
increases the number of commits you can view on one screen and with
properly written log messages makes scanning easier.
Viewing the entire history often gives you too much information. You can
limit the number of commits git log shows by providing it with -N, changing
N with the number of commits you want to display.
Often you need to see the changes made to the ﬁle in addition to the log
message to fully understand the change. You can use the -p to show the diff
the commit made.
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

VIEWING THE LOG
99
View a reverse chronological list of all commits.
prompt> git log
commit 3ac20cfb09212f212a2f60a6227610c680e8a95e
Author: Travis Swicegood <development@domain51.com>
Date:
Wed Aug 18 09:29:38 2010 -0500
add sample output for Part V
commit fa0016322bf4e73d1419ddc91777368db0f35484
Author: Travis Swicegood <development@domain51.com>
Date:
Wed Aug 18 09:12:35 2010 -0500
add in sample output for Part IV
... and so on, and so on ...
View the log with one shortened commit ID and subject.
prompt> git log --oneline
3ac20cf add sample output for Part V
fa00163 add in sample output for Part IV
8bd724b add note about empty prompt> to the intro
... and so on, and so on ...
View the last N commits.
prompt> git log -N
... examples ...
prompt> git log -5
# show the last five
prompt> git log HEAD^^^^^..HEAD # show the last five
prompt> git log -10
# show the last ten
prompt> git log HEAD~10..HEAD
# show the last ten
Show the changes made in the latest commit.
prompt> git log -1 -p HEAD
Note that it is a 1 (as in the number) and not an l (as in library).
Related Tasks
• Task 32, Comparing Differences, on page 102
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

FILTERING THE LOG OUTPUT
100
31
Filtering the Log Output
Git’s log is useful way to track what the original developer—often
yourself—was thinking when they made a change, but it often provides too
much information. You can use git log’s many parameters to ﬁlter the results
it displays, zeroing in on the information that’s important to you.
You can start to ﬁlter the results by providing Git with a directory or path.
You specify the path as the last parameter. To be safe, separate the path from
other parameters with -- (two dashes). Otherwise, Git can’t tell the difference
between the branch or tag work and the path work.
You can also ﬁlter the log based on the time of the commit. Using the --since
or --after parameter, you can look at commits after a given point in time. Git
attempts to parse any string you give it but fails silently if it can’t parse the
date you provide. Stick with traditional date and time formats or a number
followed by months, weeks, days, hours, minutes, and so on, to make sure
Git can understand you.
Git provides you with the opposite of --since and --after too; you can use
--until or --before to look for commits older than a given time.
You use --author to ﬁlter the results by author or email address. Git matches
on a partial name; --author="Travis" match both commits I make and
commits authored by “The Other Travis.”
Finally, you can use --grep to search through the log messages using a
regular expression, or regexp. It uses basic regular expressions, just like the
command-line tool it takes its name from—grep. You can tell it to ignore
case with the --regexp-ignore-case or the shorter -i parameters.
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

FILTERING THE LOG OUTPUT
101
Limit the log output to a single ﬁle or directory.
prompt> git log -- some/path/
prompt> git log -- some_file
View the commits in the last week.
You can use many kinds of times with --since or --after. Here are a few
variations of looking at the last week of commits:
prompt> git log --since="1 week"
... or ...
prompt> git log --after="7 days"
... or ...
prompt> git log --since="168 hours"
View the commits prior to the last week.
prompt> git log --before="1 week"
... or ...
prompt> git log --until="7 days"
... or ...
prompt> git log --before="168 hours"
View the log entries by a single committer.
prompt> git log --author="some user"
View the log entries containing a regular expression.
prompt> git log --grep="some [Rr]eg[Ee]x"
... or ...
prompt> git log --grep="some regex" --regexp-ignore-case
... or ...
prompt> git log --grep="some regex" -i
Related Tasks
• Task 30, Viewing the Log, on page 98
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

COMPARING DIFFERENCES
102
32
Comparing Differences
Git’s log provides you with the information about a change—who made it,
what their intent was, and so on—but sometimes looking at the changes
made to the code provides more information. git diff shows you the changes
that were made between two commits.
You can use git diff to view the changes—referred to as diffs or patches—of
two different commits or states. Most of the time it’s called as git diff with
no parameters. That’s the same as telling Git, “Show me the changes
between my working tree and the staging area.”
git diff considers changes that are staged and ready to be committed as part
of the repository. You can tell Git to show the differences between what is
staged and what is stored in the repository by adding the --staged
parameter. Note that this output does not show any changes that are in your
working tree but not yet staged.
You can also provide a single, explicit commit ID to git diff to tell Git to
compare your current working tree against what is in the repository at that
point. For example, if you want to compare your working tree against the
latest commit, regardless of what has been staged, you can provide the HEAD
parameter to tell Git to compare against that commit.
Most of the time you use git diff one of the ways discussed, but you can use
it in other ways. For example, you can provide a ﬁrst and second commit to
compare the differences between those two commits.
Looking at the differences between two commits that are far apart might
generate a lot more noise than you need. You can limit the ﬁles shown in the
diff by providing a path. The best practice is to include the path after a --,
which tells Git, “This is a path, not a revision.” Without that, Git can confuse
the path you provide with a branch or tag of the same name.
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

COMPARING DIFFERENCES
103
View the differences between the current working tree and the
staging area.
prompt> git diff
View the differences between the staged changes and
repository.
prompt> git diff --staged
View the differences between the working tree and a commit
in the repository.
prompt> git diff HEAD
prompt> git diff Commit ID
View the differences between two “commits.”
You can use a commit ID, branch name, or tag to reference a commit here.
prompt> git diff first second
... or ...
prompt> git diff first..second
... example ...
prompt> git diff 423d021 1e85ac3
... or ...
prompt> git diff 423d021..1e85ac3
Limit the diff output to a speciﬁc path.
prompt> git diff -- path/
Related Tasks
• Task 5, Seeing What Has Changed, on page 32
• Task 30, Viewing the Log, on page 98
• Task 33, Generating Statistics About Changes, on the following page
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

GENERATING STATISTICS ABOUT CHANGES
104
33
Generating Statistics About Changes
The individual commit’s changes are important, but viewing those changes
in aggregate through statistics can provide you with a unique view of the
project. Git helps you do that through the various statistical outputs it
generates.
Git’s git diff --stat is the most straightforward of the displays. It takes one or
two commits—remember, git diff assumes HEAD as its second commit if you
don’t specify it—and displays stats regarding the changes rather than
displaying the diff output. It includes ﬁle-by-ﬁle changes in addition to the
summary statistics. Git uses the diffstat command for this, so the output may
look familiar if you’re used to that program.
Sometimes all you need is the ﬁnal line of the stats output—the number of
ﬁles changed, the number of insertions, and the number of deletions. Use
--shortstat to display that information. It’s the same information displayed at
the last line of the main --stat output but without the ﬁle-by-ﬁle breakdown.
The output generated by the --stat and --shortstat parameters is not easily
parseable by a computer. You can use the --numstat parameter to generate a
three-column output that is easy to parse. The ﬁrst column is the number of
inserted lines, the second is the number of deleted lines, and the ﬁnal column
is the name of the ﬁle in question.
You can generate stats using any range of revisions that work with git diff.
Adding any of the stat parameters tells Git to output the stats without
showing the actual differences. You can add -p to the command to show both
the statistical output and the patch or to show the differences.
We’ve talked about viewing statistical information in the context of git diff,
but you can also view it from git log along with each log message. Add
--stat, --shortstat, or --numstat to any git log command to add the
respective statistical output to the log output.
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

GENERATING STATISTICS ABOUT CHANGES
105
Show change stats between the last ten commits.
prompt> git diff --stat HEAD~10
... or ...
prompt> git diff --stat HEAD~10 HEAD
Show statistics between two commits.
prompt> git diff --stat first second
... example ...
prompt> git diff --stat 423d021 1e85ac3
Show the number of ﬁles changed, inserts, and deletes in the
last ten commits.
prompt> git diff --shortstat HEAD~10
Show stats in a parseable format.
prompt> git diff --numstat HEAD~10
Show the patch in addition to the statistical information.
prompt> git diff --stat -p HEAD^
Show statistics about commits in the log.
For full stats by ﬁle:
prompt> git log --stat
To display cumulative stats only, use this:
prompt> git log --shortstat
Related Tasks
• Task 30, Viewing the Log, on page 98
• Task 32, Comparing Differences, on page 102
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

ASSIGNING BLAME
106
34
Assigning Blame
Despite its combative name, git blame is a useful tool for determining what
the original developer was thinking. Most bugs manifest themselves with an
error at a speciﬁc point. You can use git blame to ﬁnd out when the problem
line was introduced into the repository and use that as a jumping-off point
for further investigation.
git blame displays all or a portion of a ﬁle with annotations showing when
the change was made, by who, and, more importantly, in what revision the
change was made. Armed with that, you can inspect the log to determine
what the original author intended.
git blame outputs the following information:
• Short commit ID
• Author’s name
• Date and time of commit
• Line number
By default, the entire ﬁle is displayed. You can limit the portion of the ﬁle
displayed by using the -L parameter. It requires one parameter: a number or
POSIX regular expression.
You can specify the point to stop, as well, by providing a second value as part
of a comma-separated string. Make sure there’s no space between the start, the
comma, and the second value. The second value can be another line number,
a regular expression, or a number with a plus (+) or minus (-) before it.
The plus sign shows the start plus the number of lines; the minus sign adjusts
the start to show the number of lines before the start. Remember that the plus
and minus are zero-indexed. For example, -L 10,+10 shows lines 10 through
19, not lines 10 through 20.
Git can track content that moves around in a ﬁle or is copied from one ﬁle to
another. You can use git blame to show content that has moved around by
adding the -M parameter.
You can also track changes copied from another ﬁle by using the -C
parameter. It checks the changes in the ﬁle against other changes in the
repository to see whether it was copied from somewhere else.
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

ASSIGNING BLAME
107
Display ﬁle with entire line-by-line commit information.
prompt> git blame some/file
Start the output of blame at line 10.
prompt> git blame -L 10 some/file
Limit the output of blame to lines 10 through 20.
prompt> git blame -L 10,20 some/file
... or ...
prompt> git blame -L 10,+11 some/file
... or ...
prompt> git blame -L 20,-11 some/file
Show ten lines of output from blame starting at a POSIX regular
expression.
prompt> git blame -L "/def to_s/",+10 some/file
Check the history to see the change was moved, and display
that information.
prompt> git blame -M some/file
Check the history to see whether the change was copied from
somewhere else or moved around within the ﬁle, and display
that information.
prompt> git blame -C some/file
Related Tasks
• Task 30, Viewing the Log, on page 98
• Task 32, Comparing Differences, on page 102
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

Part VII
Fixing Things

FIXING THINGS
109
As we discussed earlier, Git breaks the process of committing a
change and sharing that same change into two separate proces-
ses. The beneﬁt of that separation comes into sharp focus when you
need to ﬁx something.
Every commit in Git can be changed. You should avoid making
changes to commits you’ve shared to avoid potential conﬂicts with
other developers. Keeping that in mind, you can adjust commits as
much as you want.
Covered in this part:
• You need to ﬁx a typo, you forgot to run the unit tests before
committing and accidentally broke them, or you found a bug
after the commit. You learn how to ﬁx these issues in Task 35,
Fixing Commits, on the next page.
• You can undo a commit after you’ve shared your changes by
reverting it—applying the reverse of a commit as a new com-
mit. You learn how to do this in Task 36, Reverting Commits, on
page 112.
• You can reset your current HEAD to any other commit in the
repository and start working from there. In practice, it’s most
useful to undo one or more of the most recent commits. We
cover this in Task 37, Resetting Staged Changes and Commits,
on page 114.
• Sometimes you don’t need to ﬁx a commit; you need to re-
move it entirely. You learn how to do that in Task 38, Erasing
Commits, on page 116.
• Fixing and removing commits is the easy part. Most issues are
bugs in your code. Git provides an excellent tool for isolat-
ing the commit (or commits) that introduced a bug. You learn
about it in Task 39, Finding Bugs with bisect, on page 118.
• Finally, all of this rewriting can cause issues if you’re not care-
ful. One of Git’s mandates is to not lose code, though, so it
provides the reﬂog to help you recover. You learn how to nav-
igate it in Task 40, Retrieving “Lost” Commits, on page 120.
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

FIXING COMMITS
110
35
Fixing Commits
One of the advantages of Git is the ability to “ﬁx” commits. Fixing changes
can be as simple as ﬁxing typos that got committed, ﬁxing a bug you didn’t
catch because you hadn’t run your unit tests yet, or doing something as
complex as rearranging an entire series of commits so they are ordered more
logically.
git commit --amend is the way to ﬁx the most recent commit. It comes in
handy for those simple ﬁxes that you catch right away. It is a convenience
wrapper around using git reset --soft HEAD^ (see Task 37, Resetting Staged
Changes and Commits, on page 114) and git commit -c ORIG_HEAD. You
can use the -C parameter with --amend when you want to reuse the original
commit message.
You can use git rebase -i to replay the history of your repository and stop at
certain points. Run the command, provide it with the parent of the commit
you want to edit, and then mark that commit as “edit.” Git stops at that point
and then lets you work on your repository as if it were the previous commit
(see Task 28, Controlling How You Replay Commits, on page 90).
You can ﬁx typos, remove some buggy code, or do anything else you would
normally do with the previous commit. Then, call git rebase --continue so
Git can ﬁnish rebasing the rest of the history.
It’s worth noting again: be careful when rewriting history. Feel free to
rewrite to your heart’s content until you share your work. After that, only
rewrite when you have no other option available.
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

FIXING COMMITS
111
Amend the previous commit.
Make the changes you want and stage those changes, and then use this:
prompt> git commit --amend
... launch editor ...
Amend the previous commit, and keep the same log message.
prompt> git commit --amend -C HEAD
[master 38ec64e] update the README
1 files changed, 5 insertions(+), 0 deletions(-)
Fix the previous commit by removing it entirely.
prompt> git reset --hard HEAD^
HEAD is now at 68f3164 use json if available
Use interactive rebase to edit a commit other than the last one.
This command allows you to rewrite history by changing commits. In this
example, say you want to edit the third commit before HEAD:
prompt> git rebase -i HEAD~3
... launches editor, mark the first commit (the one you want
... to change) as "edit" instead of "pick", then save
... and exit your editor
...
... make the change you want to your commit, then:
prompt> git commit --amend
prompt> git rebase --continue
Related Tasks
• Task 16, Rewriting History by Rebasing, on page 60
• Task 28, Controlling How You Replay Commits, on page 90
• Task 36, Reverting Commits, on the next page
• Task 37, Resetting Staged Changes and Commits, on page 114
• Task 40, Retrieving “Lost” Commits, on page 120
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

REVERTING COMMITS
112
36
Reverting Commits
Sometimes we make mistakes. A commit that wasn’t supposed to be shared
gets pushed to a public repository, a commit has a bug that can’t be ﬁxed and
needs to be undone, or maybe you just don’t need that code any longer.
These cases all call for git revert.
The git revert command does just what you might expect. It reverts a single
commit by applying a reverse commit to the history.
You can call git revert with just a commit ID. Git launches the editor with
the commit message already ﬁlled out. It follows this pattern:
Revert "some commit message"
This reverts commit <some commit hash>.
You can edit this message to be whatever you want. You can use the
--no-edit parameter to tell Git to use the default message without passing it
through the editor if the default is sufﬁcient.
Sometimes you need to revert several commits to completely undo a change.
You can use --no-commit, or you can use -n to tell Git to perform the revert
but stop short of committing the change. This lets you combine all the revert
commits into one commit, which is useful if you need to revert a feature that
spans several commits. Make sure that you revert commits in reverse
order—the newest commit ﬁrst. Otherwise, you might confuse Git by trying
to revert code that doesn’t exist yet.
You can use git revert to undo commits that you don’t want or need any
longer, but it does leave a trace. In most cases, you don’t want commits
“disappearing” from your repository. For those instances where you don’t
want a record of your commit at all, see Task 38, Erasing Commits, on
page 116.
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

REVERTING COMMITS
113
Revert a particular commit.
prompt> git revert <commit id>
... example ...
prompt> git revert de3245fa
Finished one revert.
... launches editor ...
[master 743d2ef] Revert "simplify this code a bit"
1 files changed, 1 insertions(+), 1 deletions(-)
Revert a particular commit, and use the default message.
prompt> git revert --no-edit <commit id>
... example ...
prompt> git revert --no-edit de3245fa
Finished one revert.
... launches editor ...
[master 3a26b89] Revert "simplify this code a bit"
1 files changed, 1 insertions(+), 1 deletions(-)
Revert a commit, but don’t commit the change.
prompt> git revert --no-commit <commit id>
Finished one revert.
... or ...
prompt> git revert -n <commit id>
Finished one revert.
Related Tasks
• Task 35, Fixing Commits, on page 110
• Task 37, Resetting Staged Changes and Commits, on the following
page
• Task 38, Erasing Commits, on page 116
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

RESETTING STAGED CHANGES AND COMMITS
114
37
Resetting Staged Changes and
Commits
The git reset command lets you change the HEAD—the latest commit your
working tree points to—of your repository. It modiﬁes either the staging area
or the staging area and working tree.
Git’s ability to craft commits exactly like you want means that you
sometimes need to undo changes to the changes you staged with git add.
You can do that by calling git reset HEAD <ﬁle to change>. This is the
most common use of the reset and is like Subversion’s svn revert command.
Remember not to get the two confused. (For more on git revert, see Task 36,
Reverting Commits, on page 112.)
You have two options to get rid of changes completely. git checkout HEAD
<ﬁle(s) or path(s)> is a quick way to undo changes to your staging area and
working tree. Be careful with this command, however, because it removes all
changes to your working tree. Git doesn’t know about those changes since
they’ve never been committed. There’s no way to get those changes back
once you run this command.
Another command at your disposal is git reset --hard. It is equally
destructive to your working tree—any uncommitted changes or staged
changes are lost after running it. Running git reset --hard HEAD does the
same thing as git checkout HEAD . (with an extra period after HEAD); it just
doesn’t require a ﬁle or path to work.
You can use git reset --hard to remove more than staged changes and
changes to your working tree. You can give it any commit ID to tell Git to
reset your HEAD to that and move the current branch to that location. For
example, if you make two commits and then realize neither should be there,
a quick git reset --hard HEAD^^ ﬁxes that.
You can use --soft with git reset. It resets the repository to the commit you
specify and stages all of those changes. Any changes you have already
staged are not affected, nor are the changes in your working tree.
Finally, you can use --mixed to reset the working tree without staging any
changes. This also unstages any changes that are staged.
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

RESETTING STAGED CHANGES AND COMMITS
115
Reset staged changes, but don’t erase any changes.
prompt> git reset HEAD
Unstaged changes after reset:
M
dolt/__init__.py
... to reset just certain file(s) ...
prompt> git reset HEAD <file1> [<file2> <and so on>]
Completely undo the last commit.
Warning: Be careful with this command; it overwrites the changes in any
ﬁles in your working tree.
prompt> git checkout HEAD <file or path to reset>
prompt>
Completely remove the last three commits.
Remember, --hard erases any uncommitted changes in your working tree.
Git doesn’t know about those, so you can’t get them back.
prompt> git reset --hard HEAD^^^
... or ...
prompt> git reset --hard HEAD~3
HEAD is now at 5eada39 add basic read-only version of api wrapper
Reset last commit and stage the changes.
This is useful if the commit has a lot changes, and only a few ﬁles and/or
paths need to be altered before committing the changes again.
prompt> git reset --soft HEAD^
prompt>
Undo the last change to HEAD.
prompt> git reset ORIG_HEAD
Unstaged changes after reset:
M
dolt/apis/external.py
... if you want to completely remove any changes ...
prompt> git reset --hard ORIG_HEAD
HEAD is now at 99a7a58 fix params_template
Related Tasks
• Task 16, Rewriting History by Rebasing, on page 60
• Task 36, Reverting Commits, on page 112
• Task 35, Fixing Commits, on page 110
• Task 38, Erasing Commits, on the following page
• Task 40, Retrieving “Lost” Commits, on page 120
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

ERASING COMMITS
116
38
Erasing Commits
You can tell Git to erase commits. This is contradictory to most version
control systems, but you can treat any commit you haven’t shared with the
rest of the world as something that can be adjusted as necessary.
A word of caution before we get into speciﬁcs, though. Don’t delete
commits that you’ve shared without a very good reason. Deleting commits
causes the history to be rewritten, causing the ripple effect problems like a
git rebase. If you’re shared commits, your best bet is git revert (see Task
36, Reverting Commits, on page 112).
You can use git rebase a couple of different ways to handle deletes. First,
you can add the -i parameter to go into an interactive rebase. Once launched,
delete the line (or lines) for the commit you don’t want to keep, save and exit
the editor, and you’re off.
Second, you can use --onto to tell Git to rebase onto the commit you want to
get rid of. You must specify three parameters: ﬁrst, you specify the commit
you want to start on (the commit before the commit you want to delete);
second, you specify the commit before the one you want to start at again;
third, you specify the ﬁnal commit you want available.
Dissecting the command from the opposite page, you’re telling Git you want
to rebase HEAD (HEAD^ through HEAD, or the last commit) onto c2d2245.
You can also use git reset to remove any number of the latest commits off
the end of your repository. You can use --hard to remove the changes from
both your index and your working tree, but be careful. This deletes any
changes you have in your working tree. git stash (see Task 26, Temporarily
Hiding Changes, on page 86) is a good idea if you have changes you want to
hang on to.
Remember, you can always use git reﬂog (see Task 40, Retrieving “Lost”
Commits, on page 120) if one of these commands goes awry. Be mindful of
your working tree, though. It warrants repeating: git reset --hard deletes
uncommitted changes from your working tree, and those uncommitted
changes can’t be retrieved.
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

ERASING COMMITS
117
Erase with an interactive rebase.
prompt> git rebase -i <commit to erase>^
For example, to erase commit c2d2245, use this:
prompt> git rebase -i c2d2245^
... launches editor ...
Delete the line that contains the c2d2245 commit, and then save and exit the
editor so git rebase can run.
Erase with git rebase --onto.
For example, imagine these commits in your repository:
c2d2245
/
2245d2c
/
/
o--o--o--o
\
\
\
HEAD
224cd25
Use the following to delete commits 224cd25 and 2245d2c:
prompt> git rebase --onto c2d2245 HEAD^ HEAD
First, rewinding head to replay your work on top of it...
Applying: add API object for interacting with remote API
And after the rebase is successful, the branch looks like this:
c2d2245
/
o--o
\
HEAD
Erase the last commit.
prompt> git reset --hard HEAD^
Related Tasks
• Task 16, Rewriting History by Rebasing, on page 60
• Task 36, Reverting Commits, on page 112
• Task 40, Retrieving “Lost” Commits, on page 120
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

FINDING BUGS WITH BISECT
118
39
Finding Bugs with bisect
Unit tests, code review, pair programming, and any number of practices help
limit the number of bugs in your code. We all end up having to track down
bugs, though. It’s part of software development. git bisect helps you limit
the time you spend on this unpleasant task by helping you search through
your repository’s history for the commit that introduced the bug.
git bisect works by dividing and conquering. You know that a particular
commit has a bug in it, or is bad. You also know that a particular point in the
past didn’t have that bug in it, or is good.
bisect takes the remaining commits, divides them in half, and sets your
working tree to that midway point in the history. You can check your
repository for the bug and mark it as either good or bad. Repeat until you
narrow the list of possible commits down to the commit that introduced the
bug.
You can skip a commit if there’s no way to test it. Be careful skipping
commits, however. Skipping too many can make it impossible for Git to
know which commit caused the bug.
After you’ve found the commit with the bug and determined how to ﬁx it,
you need to move back to the original branch where you started. git bisect
reset takes care of that.
You can automate the process of marking a commit as good or bad with a
script. It can be any shell script. The script must use its exit status code to
mark whether the commit it is testing is good, is bad, or should be skipped.
There are three possible exit code status that cause bisect to mark a commit
as good, as bad, or as skipped:
• 0 to mark as good
• 1 or greater to mark as bad
• 125 to skip
Git changes your working tree between each test, so make sure that the script
you give to git bisect run is independent of the repository history. Create the
simplest possible test and put it outside of your working tree, and then use it
there so git bisect doesn’t accidentally overwrite it.
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

FINDING BUGS WITH BISECT
119
Use bisect to narrow down the buggy commit.
prompt> git bisect start
prompt> git bisect bad
prompt> git bisect good <some commit id>
... mark each commit as good or bad until you
... have narrowed the list of commits down to the
... commit with that introduces the bug
... once you've found the commit and figured out
... how to address it, run the following to return
... back to the branch you started at
prompt> git bisect reset
Use a shortcut to start bisect with HEAD being bad.
prompt> git bisect start HEAD <some good commit id>
... continue as above
Use an automated script to test commits.
prompt> git bisect start HEAD <some good commit id>
prompt> git bisect run /path/to/test/script
... once you've figured out the fix
prompt> git bisect reset
Find a bug in the history with bisect.
The commit to the right is HEAD, and the commit to the left is known to be
good. git bisect cuts the repository in half, and through a process of
elimination shows that HEAD^ is the commit that introduced the bug. Now,
imagine there were 100 commits separating HEAD and the last known good
commit!
√
√
X
X
Known Bad
Known Good
Bisect Starts Here
Marked as Good
The bad commit is
introduced here
Related Tasks
• Task 30, Viewing the Log, on page 98
• Task 32, Comparing Differences, on page 102
• Task 34, Assigning Blame, on page 106
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

RETRIEVING “LOST” COMMITS
120
40
Retrieving “Lost” Commits
Rebasing commits causes the history of your repository to change. Ever
wonder what happens if you accidentally delete the wrong commit in an
interactive rebase? The commit—the point in the repository that recorded the
change—is still stored in your repository, but it’s orphaned. You can use the
reﬂog to ﬁnd that commit, even though the normal Git log doesn’t show it.
The Git reﬂog tracks every time the tip of a branch changes. The tip is the
commit that a particular branch points to. Back in Part III, Organizing Your
Repository with Branches and Tags, we talked more about branches and how
they are pointers to commits. Each time you commit a change to a branch,
the branch is updated to point to that new commit, and the change is logged
in the reﬂog.
During normal Git usage, you don’t need to concern yourself with the reﬂog.
It’s handy for ﬁxing mistakes, however.
For example, you run an interactive rebase (discussed in more detail in Task
28, Controlling How You Replay Commits, on page 90) and a few days later
realize that you accidentally removed the wrong commit during the rebase.
Catching it right after the fact means you can use git reset ORIG_HEAD, but
since you didn’t, your options are limited to one: using the reﬂog.
Running git reﬂog, you can ﬁnd the commit before you ran your rebase and
check it out directly. From there, you can determine the commit IDs for the
missing commit, switch to your current branch, and cherry-pick the change
back into your current branch.
Also available are the subcommands delete and expire, which delete
speciﬁc reﬂog entries and expire entries beyond a certain point, respectively.
Under most normal circumstances, you don’t need to use either.
Rewriting history is a powerful part of the Git toolkit. The reﬂog helps keep
you from hurting yourself too much.
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

RETRIEVING “LOST” COMMITS
121
View the reﬂog.
prompt> git reflog
Retrieve a lost commit.
First, let’s “lose” a few commits:
prompt> mkdir /work/tmp-repo && cd /work/tmp-repo
prompt> git init
Initialized empty Git repository in /work/tmp-repo/.git/
... add files a, b, c, d to the repository so we have some commits ...
prompt> for i in a b c d
do echo "simple $i" >> $i && git add $i && git commit -m "simple $i"
done
... output from Git ...
prompt> git rebase -i HEAD~2
... delete the "simple b" commit ...
Successfully rebased and updated refs/heads/master.
prompt> git log --oneline
4325c46 simple c
4b2a2ba simple a
... re-run the for loop above to add a few new commits ...
You can see that you’ve deleted the =simple b commit. Now you can save it
with git reﬂog:
prompt> git reflog
7ab141b HEAD@{0}: commit: simple e
... and so on, and so on ...
4b2a2ba HEAD@{3}: checkout: moving from master to 4b2a2ba
e563dcc HEAD@{4}: commit: simple c
2b469ed HEAD@{5}: commit: simple b
prompt> git cherry-pick 2b469ed
Finished one cherry-pick.
[master fcc3a79] simple b
1 files changed, 1 insertions(+), 0 deletions(-)
create mode 100644 b
Related Tasks
• Task 16, Rewriting History by Rebasing, on page 60
• Task 27, Cherry-Picking Commits, on page 88
• Task 28, Controlling How You Replay Commits, on page 90
• Task 42, Doing Some Git Housekeeping, on page 126
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

Part VIII
Moving Beyond the Basics

MOVING BEYOND THE BASICS
123
At this point you have learned all of the main topics you need to
become a proﬁcient Git user. There are a handful of commands
that you’ll only need to use occasionally.
Covered in this part:
• You may need to export the current state of your repository
without the entire history. You learn how to do that in Task 41,
Exporting Your Repository, on the following page.
• Git attempts to remain as fast as possible, sometimes at the
cost of storage efﬁciency. Task 42, Doing Some Git Housekeep-
ing, on page 126 shows you the commands to run to recal-
culate your repository’s internal structure and save some disk
space.
• Many developers are still working in an environment where
Subversion is their company’s version control system of choice.
Git provides bidirectional support for SVN—it can both read
from and write to an SVN server. You learn about that in Task
43, Syncing with Subversion, on page 128.
• Finally, we’ve talked about repositories exclusively in the con-
text of repositories with a working tree, but there is another
type of repository: a bare repo. These are used for sharing
changes via pushing and pulling to and from. They’re covered
in Task 44, Initializing Bare Repositories, on page 130.
Now, let’s start off with exporting your repository.
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

EXPORTING YOUR REPOSITORY
124
41
Exporting Your Repository
Sharing your repository with other developers is a matter of giving them
access to read your public repository, but sometimes you need to give access
to content you’re tracking to people who don’t use Git: clients, customers, or
business partners of a less tech-savvy variety. You can export the contents of
your repository at a particular point to share with these people using the git
archive command.
It’s important to remember you are exporting only one point in the history of
your repository, not the entire history. Some people look at an export as a
backup of their repository. This is not the correct way to do a backup in Git.
Each clone of your repository has the entire history, so push your repository
to a remote repository on some other computer. Backup ﬁnished.
You can specify the point you want to export as either a commit ID, HEAD or
some other special commit name, a branch, or a tag. You can also specify a
relative revision if you want to export the parent of a certain commit.
Provide a --preﬁx parameter with a trailing slash when using git archive.
That tells Git to put the contents of the archive in its own directory within
the archive so it’s expanded into its own directory when you uncompress it.
git archive exports in either a .tar format or a .zip format. You can specify
which you prefer with --format. You can skip the --format parameter if you
provide either --output or -o; Git uses the ﬁle extension from the ﬁle
provided to it to determine which type it should export.
You can also pipe the output through other commands to modify the output
further if you don’t use the --output parameter. The most common use is
piping the output through gzip or bzip2 with | gzip > some-ﬁle.tar.gz. That
turns the tar ﬁle into a gzipped tar ﬁle. You can also pipe a zip ﬁle to gzip,
but that would be redundant and repetitive.18
You can also export individual directories of your repository in addition to
exporting the entire repository. You do this by specifying the revision you
want to export and adding a colon and the name of the directory you want to
export.
18. I really don’t recommend doing that, just in case the geek humor didn’t make it through in
print.
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

EXPORTING YOUR REPOSITORY
125
Create a tar.gz ﬁle of the latest changes in master.
prompt> git archive --format=tar \
--prefix=my-project-latest/ \
HEAD | gzip > my-project-latest.tar.gz
prompt>
... or ...
prompt> git archive --prefix=my-project-latest \
--output my-project-latest.tar && \
gzip my-project-latest.tar
prompt>
Create a zip of the repository at tag v1.0.2.
prompt> git archive --format=zip \
--prefix=my-project-1.0.2/ \
v1.0.2 > my-project-1.0.2.zip
prompt>
... or ...
prompt> git archive --prefix=my-project-1.0.2/ \
v1.0.2 -o my-project-1.0.2.zip
prompt>
Export one directory.
prompt> git archive --format=zip \
--prefix=my-project/ \
HEAD:<some directory> > my-project.zip
prompt>
Related Tasks
• Task 3, Creating a New Repository, on page 24
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

DOING SOME GIT HOUSEKEEPING
126
42
Doing Some Git Housekeeping
One of Git’s key advantages is its speed. Keeping it fast requires some
tuning, however. The git gc command provides the tuning tool.
git gc performs several housecleaning tasks. First, it removes any “loose
objects” in the repository over a certain age. All of those commits you
remove via git rebase, git reset, and so on, are still tracked by Git; they’re
just orphaned.
Second, it recalculates the deltas. Deltas are the differences between two
pieces of content in the repository. Many times the ﬁrst pass at creating the
delta is not the most efﬁcient. Recalculating the deltas with the help of
hindsight allows Git to combine like deltas to reduce the size of the
repository and decrease the time Git spends looking for information in the
repository.
Periodic running of git gc helps keep the repository in top shape. Providing
it with the --aggressive parameter tells Git to focus on making the
repository as efﬁcient as possible, instead of trying to run the command as
quickly as possible.
Git is conﬁgured by default to remove loose objects that are older than the
gc.pruneExpire values. The default value is two weeks, but you can change
this using git conﬁg. You can also change it by providing a value to git gc
via the --prune=<some value> parameter. This takes the standard time
values.
Many of the commands that cause the repository history to become unruly
automatically call git gc for you. The most notable is git svn rebase. Older
versions of Git required that you run git gc manually to keep the repository
size in check. It’s still a good idea to run git gc from time to time, though, to
make sure your repository is in top shape.
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

DOING SOME GIT HOUSEKEEPING
127
Run garbage collection.
prompt> git gc
Counting objects: 3048, done.
Delta compression using up to 2 threads.
Compressing objects: 100% (2564/2564), done.
Writing objects: 100% (3048/3048), done.
Total 3048 (delta 2041), reused 667 (delta 476)
Removing duplicate objects: 100% (256/256), done.
Run a more garbage collection in the most size-optimized way.
prompt> git gc --aggressive
Counting objects: 3048, done.
Delta compression using up to 2 threads.
Compressing objects: 100% (2564/2564), done.
Writing objects: 100% (3048/3048), done.
Total 3048 (delta 2041), reused 667 (delta 476)
Removing duplicate objects: 100% (256/256), done.
Remove “loose objects” that are older than a week.
prompt> git gc --prune="1 week"
Counting objects: 244, done.
Delta compression using up to 2 threads.
Compressing objects: 100% (228/228), done.
Writing objects: 100% (244/244), done.
Total 244 (delta 109), reused 0 (delta 0)
Related Tasks
• Task 16, Rewriting History by Rebasing, on page 60
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

SYNCING WITH SUBVERSION
128
43
Syncing with Subversion
One of Git’s key advantages over other DVCSs early on was its ability to
communicate with Subversion through git-svn. Though other DVCSs now
have integration with Subversion to varying degrees, Git still leads the pack.
git-svn is installed by default on most systems, but on Ubuntu and other
Linux-based systems that break up software into individual packages. you do
need to install it separately (see Task 1, Installing Git, on page 20).
You can clone a Subversion repository with a standard layout19 by using git
svn clone -s and providing Git with the repository URL. You can use
--trunk, --tags, and --branches to provide Git with a custom location for
your trunk, tags, and branches.
Creating a clone is all you need to do if you’re migrating to Git from
Subversion, but Git can continue to talk to Subversion if you’re not making
the switch.
There is no direct git svn update available on Subversion clones. Instead,
you use git svn rebase to update your local branch with the upstream
changes in Subversion. This fetches the changes from Subversion and then
rebases your local branch against the upstream changes.
Remember, using rebasing commits (whether with git rebase or through git
svn rebase) comes at a potential cost. git-svn requires a rebase to keep track
of which commits are in Subversion and which are only in Git. Because of
this, it’s not a good idea to share changes directly via Git clones of
Subversion repositories. Use Subversion for sharing changes.
You can push changes back upstream to a Subversion repository with git svn
dcommit. You can add the -n parameter if you want to see what commits
will be sent upstream without actually sending them.
The output from any of the git svn commands could take up several pages of
output, so I haven’t included any output here.
19. http://svnbook.red-bean.com/en/1.5/svn.tour.importing.html#svn.tour.importing.layout
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

SYNCING WITH SUBVERSION
129
Create a Git clone of a standard Subversion repository.
prompt> git svn clone -s svn://example.com/repo
Perform the equivalent of an svn update.
prompt> git svn rebase
Push changes back to upstream Subversion repository.
prompt> git svn dcommit
Or, to see what commits would be sent back upstream, use this:
prompt> git svn dcommit -n
Related Tasks
• Task 16, Rewriting History by Rebasing, on page 60
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

INITIALIZING BARE REPOSITORIES
130
44
Initializing Bare Repositories
Most Git repositories that you work with have both the repository metadata
(the ﬁles located in the .git/ directory) and a working tree (the ﬁles that you
interact with). Repositories that are meant to pushed to and pulled from,
however, are generally created as bare repositories—repositories that don’t
have a working tree.
You use a bare repository to push your changes to. You generally need only
one, but you can have as many as your situation might require. For example,
you might need to create two, each one on different servers, so a different set
of people can access it. You need to make sure to remember to push to both
repositories, though.
Using these repositories helps you separate the act of committing changes
and the act of sharing those changes. You keep your local repository
private—no one can read directly to it, and no one can push to it. You use a
remote repository as a place to share your changes with everyone else.
A bare repository works just like a normal repository, except it doesn’t have
a copy of the working tree. All of the ﬁles that are present in the .git/ of your
normal repository are present in the directory where your bare repository
lives.
By convention, bare repositories should end in .git. For example, call your
bare repository widget.git if its name is widget.
To share your repository, place it somewhere that other people can access it.
This could be a network ﬁle system, on a directory with proper read
permissions on a remote server, or even on an HTTP server. You can also
make it accessible via the git daemon so it is accessible via the git protocol.
Most third-party hosting solutions, such as GitHub20 or Gitorious,21 handle
the creation of the bare repository for you. You only have to push the
changes to the repository they create. Likewise, if you use Gitosis,22 it
handles the creation of a bare repository for you.
You can use the git clone --mirror command if you want to clone an existing
repository and populate it with the commits from that remote repository.
This is useful for creating local copies of a repository to interact with and
possibly share, without exposing your private local repository.
20. http://github.com/
21. http://gitorious.com/
22. http://eagain.net/gitweb/?p=gitosis.git
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

INITIALIZING BARE REPOSITORIES
131
Initialize a bare repository.
prompt> git init --bare /path/to/some/repo.git
Initialized empty Git repository in /path/to/some/repo.git
Create a bare repository copy of a remote repository.
prompt> git clone --mirror <remote repository>
... example ...
prompt> git clone --mirror /work/repo
Cloning into bare repository repo.git...
done.
Related Tasks
• Task 4, Creating a Local Copy of an Existing Repository, on page 26
• Task 19, Adding and Removing Remotes, on page 70
• Task 21, Retrieving Remote Changes, Part II, on page 74
• Task 22, Sending Changes to Remotes, on page 76
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

Glossary
• ^: Adding a caret to any commit name (a commit ID, branch name,
or tag) tells Git to use that commit, minus one. You can add multiple
carets: HEAD^^ means HEAD minus two, and so on.
• ~#: The tilde followed by a number is used with a commit name (a
commit ID, branch name, or tag) to specify the commit located at that
point minus the number: HEAD~2 means two commits before HEAD,
and so on.
• amend: Applies the commit that is being made to the previous commit
to amend it.
• bare repository: A repository without a working tree. Generally used
for repositories that are meant to be pushed and pulled to and from.
• blame: An annotated view of a ﬁle (or portion of a ﬁle) that shows what
commit a change was made in, when that commit happened, and who
made it.
• branch: A separate line of history within the repository stored as a
pointer to a particular commit.
• check out or checkout: The act of taking a branch or ﬁles from the
repository and checking it out into the working tree.
• cherry-pick: Taking one commit and applying it to the current branch.
• commit: The individual points in time that your repository tracks. Each
commit in Git tracks who made it, when it was made, the changes that
were made, and what commit (or commits) are its direct parents.
• commit ID: The ID for each commit is an SHA-1 hash based on the data
that makes up a commit. Any change to the commit causes a different
commit ID to be generated. Each commit provides its own integrity
check through its ID.
• commit message: A plain-text message that is stored with the commit.
It is used to convey what the commit did and why. By convention, Git

GLOSSARY
133
breaks commit messages into two parts. The ﬁrst line is considered the
subject, followed by an empty line, followed by the body of the commit
message.
• conﬂict: See merge conﬂict.
• diff: Describes the differences between two (or more) versions of a ﬁle
or ﬁles.
• fast-forward merge: A merge that moves the pointer of a branch to
another point in the future without creating a merge commit.
• fetch: Retrieving commits from a remote repository and storing them
in the local repository.
• HEAD: The latest point in your repository that your working tree cur-
rently points to.
• index: See staging area.
• interactive rebase: Same as rebase, except Git pauses before the rebase
is started and allows you to modify the commits that are being applied,
modify the order in which they are applied, and specify which commits
should be stopped at so they can be edited.
• log: A reverse chronological output of all the commits that, by default,
include the committer, commit date, commit ID, and commit message.
• master: Refers to the name of the default branch where the majority
of development happens in Git.
• merge: Bringing the contents of two separate branches into sync by
merging them together. This can happen by any number of merge strat-
egies, the most common of which are a fast-forward merge and a recur-
sive merge.
• merge commit: A commit with multiple parents used to signify a merg-
ing of two or more branches. Merge commits are generally created by
recursive merges.
• merge conﬂict: A conﬂict that happens when two commits attempt
make changes that cannot be reconciled by automated means. This
generally happens during a merge or while replaying commits during
a rebase.
• non-fast-forward merge: See recursive merge.
• ORIG_HEAD: Refers to the location of HEAD before making any big
changes to it such as running git rebase or git reset.
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

GLOSSARY
134
• origin: The default name for your main remote repository.
• patch: The differences between two states of a ﬁle along with metadata
explaining which ﬁle or ﬁles were modiﬁed.
• patch mode: An interactive mode of staging ﬁles via git add or git
stash that allows you to stage portions of the change rather than the
entire ﬁle.
• pull: The act of fetching changes from a remote repository and merg-
ing them into your local branch via git pull. This can be done with a
standard merge or via a rebase.
• push: The act of sending commits to a remote repository. Generally
used when sending your changes to a repository that others can access.
• rebase: Replaying one or more commits on top of another point in
the history of the repository. Generally used between branches, often
where the point you are rebasing against is a remote branch.
• recursive merge: A merge where a merge commit is created.
• reﬂog: A log of all changes to the point of a branch (for example, new
commits, checkouts, rebases, and so on). Useful for ﬁxing bad rebases.
• refspec: References to a particular point inside the repository. Used to
refer to branches, it follows the <source>:<destination> schema. Nor-
mally used with git pull and git push. When pulling, the source is the
remote branch, and the destination is the local branch; when pushing,
the source is the local branch, and the destination is the remote branch.
• remote: Shorthand for remote repository, which refers to repositories
other than your own local one.
• repository: The place where all your codes and the changes to it—
commits—live.
• revert: A reverse commit, used to track when a commit was undone.
• revision: A particular commit, identiﬁed by a commit ID. See commit
and commit ID.
• stage: To add a one or more changes to the staging area to be commit-
ted.
• staging area: The place that sits between the repository and your work-
ing tree. You must stage your changes here before they are committed
to the repository.
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

GLOSSARY
135
• stash: To put all changes in the working tree into a temporary holding
area to be reapplied or discarded later. Useful when running rebase,
which requires a clean working tree.
• tag: A mark of signiﬁcance within the repository when used as a noun.
The act of creating a tag when used as a verb.
• working tree: Your copy of a particular point in the repository’s history
—normally the very last commit, or HEAD—that exists on the ﬁle sys-
tem. This is where you edit the ﬁles in your project.
Report erratum
this copy is (P1.0 printing, October 2010)

Index
A
-A parameter, staging ﬁles with, 34
-a parameter
committing with, 36
viewing branches with, 56
--abort parameter, for rebasing, 60
aborting
conﬂicts, 82
rebase, 60
--after parameter for ﬁltering log output,
100
--aggressive parameter, housekeeping
with, 126
--all parameter, fetching from remotes
with, 72 
--amend parameter 
for ﬁxing commits, 36, 110
merging with, 59
amending commits, 36, 59, 110
see also editing commits
apply command, 86 
apt-get tool, 20 
archive, exporting, 124 
--author parameter for ﬁltering log
output, 100 
auto setting for color, 22
B
backup, 124 
bare repositories, see repositories, bare
--before parameter for ﬁltering log
output, 100
bisecting, 118
blame, assigning, 106
branches
creating, 54, 86
deleting, 62
fetching speciﬁc, 72
merging, 50
metadata, 54
moving, 92
naming, 49
overview, 49–53
pulling speciﬁc, 74
pushing to speciﬁc, 76
release, 49 
remote, 68
switching, 54 
topic, 49 
tracking, 54, 70
--branches parameter, cloning
Subversion repositories with, 128
bugs, ﬁnding, 29, 106, 118 
bzip2, 124
C
-C HEAD parameter, reusing log messages
with, 36, 110
-C parameter, limiting blame command
with, 106
--cached parameter, undoing
uncommitted changes with, 40
case, ignoring in log output, 100
centralized version control systems, 12
Changed but not updated status, 32
Changes to be committed status, 32
changes, committing, see committing
changes 
checking out, 40, 54, 114
cherry-picking, 88 
--clear parameter, stashing with, 86
clones, shallow, see shallow repositories
cloning
bare repositories, 130
remote repositories, 26
Subversion repositories, 128
color settings, 22
color.ui setting, 22
commit ID
calculation of, 13, 22
cherry-picked commits, 88
rebasing effects on, 60

COMMIT MESSAGES
-F PARAMETER
shortening log display, 98
commit messages, see messages
commits
cherry-picking, 88 
comparing to repository, 102
deleting, 116 
editing, 34, 36, 59, 110 
erasing, 116 
ﬁnding bugs in, 29 
ﬁxing, 110 
merging, 50, 58 
rebasing, 50, 60, 90, 116 
resetting, 114 
retrieving deleted, 120 
reverting, 112 
specifying when viewing branches, 56
staging, 34 
stashing, 86 
tagging, 64, 78 
testing, 118 
see also committing changes; commit
ID 
committing changes, 36
cherry-picking, 88 
to remote branches, 69
versus sharing changes, 29
staging, 34 
see also commit ID; commits
comparing differences, 102
compiling documentation, 21
compiling Git from source code, 20
conﬁguration ﬁle storage, 22
conﬁguring
expiration values, 126
Git, 22
conﬂicts, handling, 82
GUI tool for, 84
while rebasing, 60
--contains parameter, viewing branches
with, 56
core editor setting, 22
core.excludesﬁle, 38
creating
branches, 54, 86
repositories, 24
tags, 64
custom log messages, 58
Cygwin installation, 20
D
dcommit option, pushing to Subversion
repositories with, 128
delete option for reﬂog, 120
deleting
branches, 62 
commits, 116 
directories, 44 
ﬁles, 44 
loose objects, 126 
reﬂog entries, 120 
remote repositories, 70 
stashes, 86 
uncommitted changes, 116 
see also resetting commit; reverting
commits 
deltas, recalculating, 126 
--depth parameter in cloning repositories,
26
diffs
colorizing, 22
statistics, 104
viewing, 34, 98, 102
directories
deleting, 44
exporting, 124
moving, 42
distributed repository model, 15, 67
distributed version control systems, 12
documentation, compiling, 21 
--drop parameter, stashing with, 86
E
-e parameter
cherry-picking with, 88
staging ﬁles with, 34
edit option in rebasing, 90
--edit parameter
cherry-picking with, 88
editing
commits, 34, 90, 110
messages, 88, 112
EDITOR environment variable, 22
editors, conﬁguring, 22
see also editing
empty directories, 34
erasing commits, 116
see also resetting commits; reverting
commits
errors, see bugs, ﬁnding; conﬂicts,
handling
excludesﬁle, 38 
excluding ﬁles, 38 
expiration values, 126 
expire option for reﬂog, 120 
exporting repositories and directories, 124
F
-f parameter
137

FAST-FORWARD MERGES
IGNORING FILES
deleting ﬁles with, 44
forcing push with, 76
overwriting ﬁles with, 42
fast-forward merges, 50
fetching, 46, 72
versus pulling, 68, 74
ﬁltering log output, 100
ﬁxing commits, 110
see also editing commits
ﬁxup option in rebasing, 90
force parameter, see -f parameter
forcing
deletion of nonmerged branches, 62
deletions, 44 
overwriting of ﬁles, 42 
recursive merges, 76
forking, 13 
--format parameter, exporting with, 124
formats for exporting, 124
G
garbage collection, 126
Git
compared to traditional VCS, 12
history, 9
git add command, 34, 36 
git archive command, 124 
git bisect command, 118 
git bisect reset command, 118 
git blame command, 106 
git branch command, 54, 56, 62
git checkout command, 40, 54 
git checkout HEAD command, 114
git cherry-pick command, 88 
git clone command, 26 
git clone --mirror command, 130
git commit command, 36, 110 
git conﬁg command, 22 
git daemon, 130 
git diff command, 102, 104 
.git extension, 130 
git fetch command, 46, 72 
git gc command, 126
.git/info.excludes ﬁle, 38 
git init command, 24 
git log command, 98
ﬁltering, 100 
viewing statistics with, 104
git merge command, 58, 82
git mergetool command, 84
git mv command, 42 
git pull command, 46, 60, 74
git push command, 46, 74, 76
git rebase command, 60
deleting commits with, 116
interactive, 90, 110, 116
moving branches with, 92
git rebase interactive command, 110
git reﬂog command, 120 
git remote add command, 70 
git remote rm command, 70 
git reset command, 114
aborting conﬂicts with, 82
undoing rebase with, 60
git reset --hard command, 114
git reset HEAD command, 40 
git revert command, 112 
git rm command, 40, 44 
git stash command, 86 
git status command, 32, 82 
git svn command, 128 
git svn clone command, 128 
git svn dcommit command, 128
git svn rebase command, 128
git tag command, 64 
git --version command, 12
GIT_EDITOR environment variable, 22
GitHub, 13, 130 
.gitignore ﬁle, 38 
gitk, 56 
Gitorious, 130 
Gitosis, 130
GitX, 56 
global excludesﬁle, 38 
--global parameter conﬁguration, 22
--grep parameter for ﬁltering log output,
100 
GUI installation, 20 
GUI tool for merge conﬂicts, 84
gzip, 124
H
--hard parameter
rebasing with, 116
resetting with, 114
hiding changes, see stashing
history, see repository history
Homebrew installation, 20
housekeeping, 126 
hybrid repository model, 16
I
-i parameter 
ﬁltering log output with, 100
launching interactive rebase with, 116
ignoring case in log output, 100
ignoring ﬁles, 38
138

INDEX
-P PARAMETER
index 
resetting, 114
staging commits, 34
initializing 
bare repositories, 130
repositories, 24
installing Git, 20 
interactive rebasing, 90, 110, 116
L
-L parameter, limiting blame command
with, 106
listing
stashes, 86
tags, 64
log, 95 
ﬁltering, 100
merges, 58 
reusing messages, 36
statistics, 104
viewing, 98
--log-commit option, merging with, 58
loose objects, removing, 126
M
-M parameter, limiting blame command
with, 106
-m parameter 
in commit messages, 36
merging with, 58
MacPorts installation, 20
merge strategies, 50
see also merging 
merge tools, 84 
--merged parameter, viewing branches
with, 56
merging
branches, 50, 56 
commits between branches, 58
conﬂicts, 60, 82, 84
fast-forward, 50 
logging, 58 
in overview of sharing process, 46
rebasing, 50, 60, 90 
recursive, 50, 76 
status of branches, 56 
see also fetching; pulling; pushing;
cherry-picking
messages
amending while merging, 59
cherry-picked commits, 88
editing, 88, 112 
merge log, 58
reusing, 36, 110
stash, 86
writing, 36, 95
metadata, branch, 54 
milestones, tagging, 64 
--mixed parameter, resetting with, 114
moving
branches, 92 
ﬁles, directories, etc., 42
msysGit, 20 
--multiple parameter, fetching from
remotes with, 72
N
-N option, limiting log with, 98
-n parameter
cherry-picking with, 88 
pushing to Subversion repositories
with, 128
reverting with, 112
naming 
bare repositories, 130
branches, 49 
remote repositories, 70
stash names, 86 
tags, 64
--no-merged parameter, viewing
branches with, 56
--no-commit parameter
cherry-picking with, 88
merging with, 58
reverting with, 112
--no-edit parameter, reverting with, 112
--no-ff option, merging with, 58
non-fast-forward merges, see recursive
merges 
--numstat parameter, viewing statistics
with, 104
O
-o parameter, exporting with, 124
--oneline parameter, viewing log with, 98
--onto parameter, rebasing with, 92, 116
open source models, 15 
OS X installation, 20 
--output parameter, exporting with, 124
overriding, see forcing 
overwriting ﬁles, 42
P
-p parameter 
staging ﬁles with, 34
139

--PATCH PARAMETER
SUBVERSION
viewing diffs in statistical output with,
104
viewing log with, 98 
--patch parameter, stashing with, 86
patches, see diffs 
pick option in rebasing, 90 
pop command, 86 
--preﬁx parameter, exporting with, 124
--prune parameter, housekeeping with,
126 
pulling, 46, 68, 74
pushing, 46, 76, 128
R
-r parameter 
deleting directories with, 44
viewing branches with, 56
--rebase parameter in overview of
sharing process, 46
rebasing, 46, 60 
deleting commits with, 116
with git pull, 60 
with git push, 74
interactive, 90, 110, 116
moving branches with, 92
Subversion repositories, 128
work ﬂow example, 50
recursive merges, 50, 76 
reﬂog, 120
--regexp-ignore-case parameter for
ﬁltering log output, 100
release branch, 49 
release manager, 67 
remote branches, see branches, remote
remote repositories, see repositories,
remote
remote tags, see tags
repositories
bare, 130 
comparing to working tree, 102
creating, 24 
exporting, 124
housekeeping, 126
initializing, 24 
layouts, 15 
private versus public, 12, 24
shallow, 26 
status of changes, 32
Subversion, 128 
see also repositories, remote;
repository history
repositories, remote, 67
adding, 70
cloning, 26, 128
fetching from, 72 
models, 67 
pulling from, 74 
pushing to, 76 
removing, 70 
sharing changes overview, 46
tracking branches, 70 
see also repositories
repository history
bisecting, 118
log, 95, 98, 100
reﬂog, 120
statistics, 104
repository URLs, 70 
resetting commits, 114
retrieving deleted commits, 120
reverting commits, 112
see also erasing commits; resetting
commits 
revision numbers, 13 
reword option in rebasing, 90
S
SHA-1 hash, calculation of commit ID,
13, 22
shallow clones, see shallow repositories
shallow repositories, 26 
shared repository model, 14, 15, 67
sharing changes, overview, 46
see also fetching; merging; pulling;
pushing; rebasing
--shortstat parameter, viewing statistics
with, 104
Signed-off-by line, 88 
--since parameter for ﬁltering log output,
100 
--skip parameter, rebasing with, 60
skipping
commits, 118
conﬂicts, 60
--soft parameter, resetting with, 114
squash option in rebasing, 90
--staged parameter, viewing diffs with,
102 
staging area, see Index
staging changes to commit, 34
comparing to repository, 102
undoing, 40
stashing, 86 
--stat parameter, viewing statistics with,
104 
statistics, generating, 104
status, viewing, 32, 82
Subversion, syncing with, 128
140

SWITCHING BRANCHES
.ZIP FORMAT
switching branches, 54
syncing with Subversion, 128
T
tags, 50 
creating, 64 
and deleting branches, 62
--tags parameter, cloning Subversion
repositories with, 128
.tar format, 124 
temporarily hiding changes, see stashing
testing commits, 118 
topic branch, 49 
Torvalds, Linus, 9 
tracking branches, 54, 70 
--trunk parameter, cloning Subversion
repositories with, 128
U
-u parameter, staging ﬁles with, 34
Ubuntu
git svn command, 128
installation, 20
uncommitted changes
deleting, 116
undoing, 40, 114
undoing 
commits, 112, 114 
deletions, 44 
rebase, 60 
uncommitted changes, 40, 114
unstaging, 40, 114
--until parameter for ﬁltering log output,
100
Untracked ﬁles status, 32
URLs, repository, 70
V
version control systems
history, 9 
models, 12
version, determining, 12 
vi environment variable, 22
viewing
branches, 56 
diffs, 98, 102 
remote repositories, 72
status, 32, 82
VISUAL environment variable, 22
W
workﬂow
example, 13
overview, 29
working tree 
comparing to repository, 102
deﬁned, 24 
deleting changes in, 116
resetting, 82, 114 
stashing changes, 86
Z
.zip format, 124
141

The Pragmatic Bookshelf
Available in paperback and DRM-free eBooks, our titles are here to help you stay on top of
your game. The following are in print as of October 2010; be sure to check our website at
pragprog.com for newer titles.
Title
Year
ISBN
Pages
Advanced Rails Recipes: 84 New Ways to Build Stunning
Rails Apps
2008
9780978739225
464
Agile Coaching
2009
9781934356432
248
Agile Retrospectives: Making Good Teams Great
2006
9780977616640
200
Agile Web Development with Rails
2009
9781934356166
792
Beginning Mac Programming: Develop with Objective-C
and Cocoa
2010
9781934356517
300
Behind Closed Doors: Secrets of Great Management
2005
9780976694021
192
Best of Ruby Quiz
2006
9780976694076
304
Cocoa Programming: A Quick-Start Guide for
Developers
2010
9781934356302
450
Core Animation for Mac OS X and the iPhone: Creating
Compelling Dynamic User Interfaces
2008
9781934356104
200
Core Data: Apple’s API for Persisting Data on Mac OS X
2009
9781934356326
256
Data Crunching: Solve Everyday Problems using Java,
Python, and More
2005
9780974514079
208
Debug It! Find, Repair, and Prevent Bugs in Your Code
2009
9781934356289
232
Deploying Rails Applications: A Step-by-Step Guide
2008
9780978739201
280
Design Accessible Web Sites: 36 Keys to Creating
Content for All Audiences and Platforms
2007
9781934356029
336
Desktop GIS: Mapping the Planet with Open Source
Tools
2008
9781934356067
368
Domain-Driven Design Using Naked Objects
2009
9781934356449
375
Enterprise Integration with Ruby
2006
9780976694069
360
Enterprise Recipes with Ruby and Rails
2008
9781934356234
416
Everyday Scripting with Ruby: for Teams, Testers, and
You
2007
9780977616619
320
ExpressionEngine 2: A Quick-Start Guide
2010
9781934356524
250
From Java To Ruby: Things Every Manager Should Know
2006
9780976694090
160
FXRuby: Create Lean and Mean GUIs with Ruby
2008
9781934356074
240
GIS for Web Developers: Adding Where to Your Web
Applications
2007
9780974514093
275
Google Maps API: Adding Where to Your Applications
2006
PDF-Only
83
Grails: A Quick-Start Guide
2009
9781934356463
200
Groovy Recipes: Greasing the Wheels of Java
2008
9780978739294
264
Hello, Android: Introducing Google’s Mobile
Development Platform
2010
9781934356562
320
Continued on next page

Title
Year
ISBN
Pages
Interface Oriented Design
2006
9780976694052
240
iPad Programming: A Quick-Start Guide for iPhone
Developers
2010
9781934356579
248
iPhone SDK Development
2009
9781934356258
576
Land the Tech Job You Love
2009
9781934356265
280
Language Implementation Patterns: Create Your Own
Domain-Speciﬁc and General Programming Languages
2009
9781934356456
350
Learn to Program
2009
9781934356364
240
Manage It! Your Guide to Modern Pragmatic Project
Management
2007
9780978739249
360
Manage Your Project Portfolio: Increase Your Capacity
and Finish More Projects
2009
9781934356296
200
Mastering Dojo: JavaScript and Ajax Tools for Great
Web Experiences
2008
9781934356111
568
Metaprogramming Ruby: Program Like the Ruby Pros
2010
9781934356470
240
Modular Java: Creating Flexible Applications with OSGi
and Spring
2009
9781934356401
260
No Fluff Just Stuff 2006 Anthology
2006
9780977616664
240
No Fluff Just Stuff 2007 Anthology
2007
9780978739287
320
Pomodoro Technique Illustrated: The Easy Way to Do
More in Less Time
2009
9781934356500
144
Practical Programming: An Introduction to Computer
Science Using Python
2009
9781934356272
350
Practices of an Agile Developer
2006
9780974514086
208
Pragmatic Guide to Git
2010
9781934356722
168
Pragmatic Project Automation: How to Build, Deploy,
and Monitor Java Applications
2004
9780974514031
176
Pragmatic Thinking and Learning: Refactor Your
Wetware
2008
9781934356050
288
Pragmatic Unit Testing in C# with NUnit
2007
9780977616671
176
Pragmatic Unit Testing in Java with JUnit
2003
9780974514017
160
Pragmatic Version Control using CVS
2003
9780974514000
176
Pragmatic Version Control Using Git
2008
9781934356159
200
Pragmatic Version Control using Subversion
2006
9780977616657
248
Programming Clojure
2009
9781934356333
304
Programming Cocoa with Ruby: Create Compelling Mac
Apps Using RubyCocoa
2009
9781934356197
300
Programming Erlang: Software for a Concurrent World
2007
9781934356005
536
Programming Groovy: Dynamic Productivity for the Java
Developer
2008
9781934356098
320
Programming Ruby: The Pragmatic Programmers’ Guide
2004
9780974514055
864
Programming Ruby 1.9: The Pragmatic Programmers’
Guide
2009
9781934356081
960
Continued on next page

Title
Year
ISBN
Pages
Programming Scala: Tackle Multi-Core Complexity on
the Java Virtual Machine
2009
9781934356319
250
Prototype and script.aculo.us: You Never Knew
JavaScript Could Do This!
2007
9781934356012
448
Rails for .NET Developers
2008
9781934356203
300
Rails for Java Developers
2007
9780977616695
336
Rails for PHP Developers
2008
9781934356043
432
Rails Recipes
2006
9780977616602
350
Rapid GUI Development with QtRuby
2005
PDF-Only
83
Release It! Design and Deploy Production-Ready
Software
2007
9780978739218
368
Scripted GUI Testing with Ruby
2008
9781934356180
192
Seven Languages in Seven Weeks: A Pragmatic Guide to
Learning Programming Languages
2010
9781934356593
300
Ship It! A Practical Guide to Successful Software Projects
2005
9780974514048
224
SQL Antipatterns: Avoiding the Pitfalls of Database
Programming
2010
9781934356555
352
Stripes ...and Java Web Development Is Fun Again
2008
9781934356210
375
Test-Drive ASP.NET MVC
2010
9781934356531
296
TextMate: Power Editing for the Mac
2007
9780978739232
208
The Agile Samurai: How Agile Masters Deliver Great
Software
2010
9781934356586
280
The Deﬁnitive ANTLR Reference: Building
Domain-Speciﬁc Languages
2007
9780978739256
384
The Passionate Programmer: Creating a Remarkable
Career in Software Development
2009
9781934356340
200
ThoughtWorks Anthology
2008
9781934356142
240
Ubuntu Kung Fu: Tips, Tricks, Hints, and Hacks
2008
9781934356227
400
Web Design for Developers: A Programmer’s Guide to
Design Tools and Techniques
2009
9781934356135
300

More Languages
Seven Languages in Seven Weeks
In this book you’ll get a hands-on tour of Clojure, Haskell, Io,
Prolog, Scala, Erlang, and Ruby. Whether or not your favorite
language is on that list, you’ll broaden your perspective of
programming by examining these languages side-by-side. You’ll
learn something new from each, and best of all, you’ll learn how to
learn a language quickly.
Seven Languages in Seven Weeks: A Pragmatic Guide to
Learning Programming Languages 
Bruce A. Tate 
(300 pages) ISBN: 978-1934356-59-3. $34.95
http://pragprog.com/titles/btlang
Language Implementation Patterns
Learn to build conﬁguration ﬁle readers, data readers, model-driven
code generators, source-to-source translators, source analyzers, and
interpreters. You don’t need a background in computer
science—ANTLR creator Terence Parr demystiﬁes language
implementation by breaking it down into the most common design
patterns. Pattern by pattern, you’ll learn the key skills you need to
implement your own computer languages.
Language Implementation Patterns: Create Your Own
Domain-Speciﬁc and General Programming Languages
Terence Parr 
(350 pages) ISBN: 978-1934356-45-6. $34.95
http://pragprog.com/titles/tpdsl

SQL and Debugging
SQL Antipatterns
If you’re programming applications that store data, then chances
are you’re using SQL, either directly or through a mapping layer.
But most of the SQL that gets used is inefﬁcient, hard to maintain,
and sometimes just plain wrong. This book shows you all the
common mistakes, and then leads you through the best ﬁxes.
What’s more, it shows you what’s behind these ﬁxes, so you’ll
learn a lot about relational databases along the way.
SQL Antipatterns: Avoiding the Pitfalls of Database
Programming 
Bill Karwin 
(300 pages) ISBN: 978-19343565-5-5. $34.95
http://pragprog.com/titles/bksqla
Debug It!
Debug It! will equip you with the tools, techniques, and approaches
to help you tackle any bug with conﬁdence. These secrets of
professional debugging illuminate every stage of the bug life cycle,
from constructing software that makes debugging easy; through
bug detection, reproduction, and diagnosis; to rolling out your
eventual ﬁx. Learn better debugging whether you’re writing Java or
assembly language, targeting servers or embedded
micro-controllers, or using agile or traditional approaches.
Debug It! Find, Repair, and Prevent Bugs in Your Code
Paul Butcher 
(232 pages) ISBN: 978-1-9343562-8-9. $34.95
http://pragprog.com/titles/pbdp

Agile Practices
The Agile Samurai
Faced with a software project of epic proportions? Tired of
over-committing and under-delivering? Enter the dojo of the agile
samurai, where agile expert Jonathan Rasmusson shows you how
to kick-start, execute, and deliver your agile projects. You’ll see
how agile software delivery really works and how to help your
team get agile fast, while having fun along the way.
The Agile Samurai: How Agile Masters Deliver Great Software
Jonathan Rasmusson 
(275 pages) ISBN: 9781934356586. $34.95
http://pragprog.com/titles/jtrap
Driving Technical Change
Your co-workers’ resistance to new technologies can be bafﬂing.
Learn to read users’ "patterns of resistance"—and then dismantle
their objections. Every developer must master the art of
evangelizing. With these techniques and strategies, you’ll help your
organization adopt your solutions—without selling your soul to
organizational politics.
Driving Technical Change: Why People On Your Team Don’t
Act On Good Ideas, and How to Convince Them They Should
Terrence Ryan 
(200 pages) ISBN: 978-1934356-60-9. $32.95
http://pragprog.com/titles/trevan

Mac iOS
Beginning Mac Programming
Aimed at beginning developers without prior programming
experience. Takes you through concrete, working examples, giving
you the core concepts and principles of development in context so
you will be ready to build the applications you’ve been imagining.
It introduces you to Objective-C and the Cocoa framework in clear,
easy-to-understand lessons, and demonstrates how you can use
them together to write for the Mac, as well as the iPhone and iPod.
Beginning Mac Programming: Develop with Objective-C and
Cocoa 
Tim Isted 
(300 pages) ISBN: 978-1934356-51-7. $34.95
http://pragprog.com/titles/tibmac
iPad Programming
It’s not an iPhone and it’s not a laptop: the iPad is a
groundbreaking new device. You need to create true iPad apps to
take advantage of all that is possible with the iPad. If you’re an
experienced iPhone developer, iPad Programming will show you
how to write these outstanding new apps while completely ﬁtting
your users’ expectation for this device.
iPad Programming: A Quick-Start Guide for iPhone
Developers 
Daniel H Steinberg and Eric T Freeman 
(250 pages) ISBN: 978-19343565-7-9. $34.95
http://pragprog.com/titles/sﬁpad

The Pragmatic Bookshelf
The Pragmatic Bookshelf features books written by developers for developers. The titles continue
the well-known Pragmatic Programmer style and continue to garner awards and rave reviews. As
development gets more and more difﬁcult, the Pragmatic Programmers will be there with more
titles and products to help you stay on top of your game.
Visit Us Online
Pragmatic Guide to Git
http://pragprog.com/titles/pg_git
Source code from this book, errata, and other resources. Come give us feedback, too!
Register for Updates
http://pragprog.com/updates
Be notiﬁed when updates and new books become available.
Join the Community
http://pragprog.com/community
Read our weblogs, join our online discussions, participate in our mailing list, interact with our
wiki, and beneﬁt from the experience of other Pragmatic Programmers.
New and Noteworthy
http://pragprog.com/news
Check out the latest pragmatic developments, new titles and other offerings.
Buy the Book
If you liked this eBook, perhaps you’d like to have a paper copy of the book. It’s available for
purchase at our store: pragprog.com/titles/pg_git.
Contact Us
Online Orders:
www.pragprog.com/catalog
Customer Service:
support@pragprog.com
Non-English Versions:
translations@pragprog.com
Pragmatic Teaching:
academic@pragprog.com
Author Proposals:
proposals@pragprog.com
Contact us:
1-800-699-PROG (+1 919 847 3884)
