6.1 
c 
ER 
A cooperating process is one that can affect or be affected by other processes 
executing in the system. Cooperating processes can either directly share a 
logical address space (that is, both code and data) or be allowed to share data 
only through files or messages. The former case is achieved through the use of 
threads, discussed in Chapter 4. Concurrent access to shared data may result in 
data inconsistency, however. In this chapter, we discuss various mechanisms 
to ensure the orderly execution of cooperating processes that share a logical 
address space, so that data consistency is maintained. 
To introduce the critical-section problem, whose solutions can be used to 
ensure the consistency of shared data. 
To present both software and hardware solutions of the critical-section 
problem. 
To introduce the concept of an atomic transaction and describe mecha-
nisms to ensure atomicity. 
In Chapter 3, we developed a model of a system consisting of cooperating 
sequential processes or threads, all running asynchronously and possibly 
sharing data. We illustrated this model with the producer-consumer problem, 
which is representative of operating systems. Specifically, in Section 3.4.1, we 
described how a bounded buffer could be used to enable processes to share 
memory. 
Let's return to our consideration of the bounded buffer. As we pointed 
out, our original solution allowed at most BUFFER_SIZE - 1 items in the buffer 
at the same time. Suppose we want to modify the algorithm to remedy this 
deficiency. One possibility is to add an integer variable counter, initialized to 
0. counter is incremented every time we add a new item to the buffer and is 
225 

226 
Chapter 6 
decremented every time we remove one item from the buffer. The code for the 
producer process can be modified as follows: 
while (true) { 
} 
I* produce an item in nextProduced *I 
while (counter == BUFFER_SIZE) 
; I* do nothing *I 
buffer[in] = nextProduced; 
in = (in + 1) % BUFFER_SIZE ; 
counter++; 
The code for the consumer process can be modified as follows: 
while (true) { 
} 
while (counter == 0) 
; I* do nothing *I 
nextConsumed = buffer[out]; 
out = (out + 1) % BUFFER_SIZE; 
counter--; 
I* consume the item in nextConsumed *I 
Although both the producer and consumer routines shown above are 
correct separately, they may not function correctly when executed concurrently. 
As an illustration, suppose that the value of the variable counter is currently 
5 and that the producer and consumer processes execute the statements 
"counter++" and "counter--" concurrently. Following the execution of these 
two statements, the value of the variable counter may be 4, 5, or 6! The only 
correct result, though, is counter == 5, which is generated correctly if the 
producer and consumer execute separately. 
We can show that the value of counter may be incorrect as follows. Note 
that the statement" counter++" may be implemented in machine language (on 
a typical machine) as 
register1 = counter 
register1 = register1 + 1 
counter= register1 
where register1 is one of the local CPU registers. Similarly, the statement 
register2"counter--" is implemented as follows: 
register2 = counter 
register2 = register2 ~ 1 
counter= register2 
where again register2 is on eo£ the local CPU registers. Even though register1 and 
register2 may be the same physical register (an accumulator, say), remember 
that the contents of this register will be saved and restored by the interrupt 
handler (Section 1.2.3). 

6.2 
6.2 
227 
The concurrent execution of "counter++" and "counter--" is equivalent 
to a sequential execution in which the lower-level statements presented 
previously are interleaved in some arbitrary order (but the order within each 
high-level statement is preserved). One such interleaving is 
To: 
producer 
execute 
register1 =counter 
{register1 = 5} 
T1: 
producer 
execute 
register1 = register1 + 1 {register1 = 6} 
T2: 
consumer execute 
register2 = counter 
{register2 = 5} 
T3: 
consumer execute 
register2 = register2 
1 {register2 = 4} 
T4: 
producer 
execute 
counter= register1 
{counter = 6} 
Ts: 
consumer execute 
counter = register2 
{counter = 4} 
Notice that we have arrived at the incorrect state "counter == 4", indicating 
that four buffers are full, when, in fact, five buffers are full. If we reversed the 
order of the statements at T4 and T5, we would arrive at the incorrect state 
"counter== 6". 
We would arrive at this incorrect state because we allowed both processes 
to manipulate the variable counter concurrently. A situation like this, where 
several processes access and manipulate the same data concurrently and the 
outcome of the execution depends on the particular order in which the access 
takes place, is called a 
To guard against the race condition 
above, we need to ensure that only one process at a time can be manipulating 
the variable counter. To make such a guarantee, we require that the processes 
be synchronized in some way. 
Situations such as the one just described occur frequently in operating 
systems as different parts of the system manipulate resources. Furthermore, 
with the growth of multicore systems, there is an increased emphasis on 
developing multithreaded applications wherein several threads-which are 
quite possibly sharing data-are rmming in parallel on different processing 
cores. Clearly, we want any changes that result from such activities not 
to interfere with one another. Because of the importance of this issue, a 
major portion of this chapter is concerned with 
and 
amongst cooperating processes. 
Consider a system consisting of n processes {Po, P1 , ... , P11 _ I}. Each process 
has a segment of code, called a cdticall 
in which the process may 
be changing common variables, updating a table, writing a file, and so on. 
The important feature of the system is that, when one process is executing in 
its critical section, no other process is to be allowed to execute in its critical 
section. That is, no two processes are executing in their critical sections at the 
same time. The critical-section problem is to design a protocol that the processes 
can use to cooperate. Each process must request permission to enter its critical 
section. The section of code implementing this request is the 
The 
critical section may be followed by an exit 
The remaining code is the 
The general structure of a typical process Pi is shown in 

228 
Chapter 6 
do { 
I entry section I 
critical section 
I exit section I 
remainder section 
} while (TRUE); 
Figure 6.1 
General structure of a typical process A. 
Figure 6.1. The entry section and exit section are enclosed in boxes to highlight 
these important segments of code. 
A solution to the critical-section problem must satisfy the following three 
requirements: 
1. Mutual exclusion. If process Pi is executing in its critical section, then no 
other processes can be executing in their critical sections. 
2. Progress. If no process is executing in its critical section and some 
processes wish to enter their critical sections, then only those processes 
that are not executing in their remainder sections can participate in 
deciding which will enter its critical section next, and this selection carmot 
be postponed indefinitely. 
Bounded waiting. There exists a bound, or limit, on the number of times 
that other processes are allowed to enter their critical sections after a 
process has made a request to enter its critical section and before that 
request is granted. 
We assume that each process is executing at a nonzero speed. However, we can 
make no assumption concerning the relative 
of the n processes. 
At a given point in time, many kernel-mode processes may be active in the 
operating system. As a result, the code implementing an operating system 
(kernel code) is subject to several possible race conditions. Consider as an 
example a kernel data structure that maintains a list of all open files in the 
system. This list must be modified when a new file is opened or closed (adding 
the file to the list or removing it from the list). If two processes were to open files 
simultaneously, the separate updates to this list could result in a race condition. 
Other kernel data structures that are prone to possible race conditions include 
structures for maintaining memory allocation, for maintaining process lists, 
and for interrupt handling. It is up to kernel developers to ensure that the 
operating system is free from such race conditions. 
Two general approaches are used to handle critical sections in operating 
systems: (1) preemptive kernels and (2) nonpreemptive kernels. A preemptive 
kernel allows a process to be preempted while it is running in kernel mode. 
A nonpreemptive kernel does not allow a process running in kernel mode 

6.3 
6.3 
229 
to be preempted; a kernel-mode process will run until it exits kernel mode, 
blocks, or voluntarily yields control of the CPU. Obviously, a nonpreemptive 
kernel is essentially free from race conditions on kernel data structures, as only 
one process is active in the kernel at a time. We cannot say the same about 
preemptive kernels, so they must be carefully designed to ensure that shared 
kernel data are free from race conditions. Preemptive kernels are especially 
difficult to design for SMP architectures, since in these environments it is 
possible for two kernel-mode processes to run simultaneously on different 
processors. 
Why, then, would anyone favor a preemptive kernel over a nonpreemptive 
one? A preemptive kernel is more suitable for real-time programming, as it will 
allow a real-time process to preempt a process currently running in the kernel. 
Furthermore, a preemptive kernel may be more responsive, since there is less 
risk that a kernel-mode process will run for an arbitrarily long period before 
relinquishing the processor to waiting processes. Of course, this effect can be 
minimized by designing kernel code that does not behave in this way. Later in 
this chapter, we explore how various operating systems manage preemption 
within the kernel. 
Next, we illustrate a classic software-based solution to the critical-section 
problem known as Peterson's solution. Because of the way modern computer 
architectures perform basic machine-language instructions, such as load and 
store, there are no guarantees that Peterson's solution will work correctly on 
such architectures. Howeve1~ we present the solution because it provides a good 
algorithmic description of solving the critical-section problem and illustrates 
some of the complexities involved in designing software that addresses the 
requirements of mutual exclusion, progress, and bomcded waiting. 
Peterson's solution is restricted to two processes that alternate execution 
between their critical sections and remainder sections. The processes are 
numbered Po and P1. For convenience, when presenting Pi, we use Pj to 
denote the other process; that is, j equals 1 - i. 
Peterson's solution requires the two processes to share two data items: 
int turn; 
boolean flag[2]; 
The variable turn indicates whose turn it is to enter its critical section. That is, 
if turn == i, then process Pi is allowed to execute in its critical section. The 
flag array is used to indicate if a process is ready to enter its critical section. 
For example, if flag [i] is true, this value indicates that Pi is ready to enter 
its critical section. With an explanation of these data structures complete, we 
are now ready to describe the algorithm shown in Figure 6.2. 
To enter the critical section, process Pi first sets flag [i] to be true and 
then sets turn to the value j, thereby asserting that if the other process wishes 
to enter the critical section, it can do so. If both processes try to enter at the same 
time, turn will be set to both i and j at roughly the sance time. Only one of these 
assignments will last; the other will occur but will be overwritten immediately. 

230 
Chapter 6 
do { 
flag [i] = TRUE; 
turn= j; 
while (flag[j] && turn 
j); 
critical section 
I flag [i] = FALSE; I 
remainder section 
} while (TRUE); 
Figure 6.2 The structure of process A in Peterson's solution. 
The eventual value of turn determines which of the two processes is allowed 
to enter its critical section first. 
We now prove that this solution is correct. We need to show that: 
Mutual exclusion is preserved. 
The progress requirement is satisfied. 
The bounded-waiting requirement is met. 
To prove property 1, we note that each P; enters its critical section only 
if either flag [j] == false or turn == i. Also note that, if both processes 
can be executing in their critical sections at the same time, then flag [0] == 
flag [1] ==true. These two observations imply that Po and P1 could not have 
successfully executed their while statements at about the same time, since the 
value of turn can be either 0 or 1 but camwt be both. Hence, one of the processes 
-say, Pi -must have successfully executed the while statencent, whereas P; 
had to execute at least one additional statement ("turn== j"). However, at 
that time, flag [j] == true and turn == j, and this condition will persist as 
long as Pi is in its critical section; as a result, mutual exclusion is preserved. 
To prove properties 2 and 3, we note that a process P; can be prevented from 
entering the critical section only if it is stuck in the while loop with the condition 
flag [j] ==true and turn=== j; this loop is the only one possible. If Pi is not 
ready to enter the critical section, then flag [j] ==false, and P; can enter its 
critical section. If Pj has set flag [j] to true and is also executing in its while 
statement, then either turn === i or turn === j. If turn == i, then P; will enter 
the critical section. If turn== j, then Pi will enter the critical section. However, 
once Pi exits its critical section, it will reset flag [j] to false, allowing P; to 
enter its critical section. If Pi resets flag [j] to true, it must also set turn to i. 
Thus, since P; does not change the value of the variable turn while executing 
the while statement, P; will enter the critical section (progress) after at most 
one entry by P1 (bounded waiting). 

6.4 
6.4 
231 
do { 
acquire lock 
critical section 
I release lock I 
remainder section 
} while (TRUE); 
Figure 6.3 Solution to the critical-section problem using locks. 
We have just described one software-based solution to the critical-section 
problem. However, as mentioned, software-based solutions such as Peterson's 
are not guaranteed to work on modern computer architectures. Instead, we 
can generally state that any solution to the critical-section problem requires a 
simple tool-a lock. Race conditions are prevented by requiring that critical 
regions be protected by locks. That is, a process must acquire a lock before 
entering a critical section; it releases the lock when it exits the critical section. 
This is illustrated in Figure 6.3. 
In the following discussions, we explore several more solutions to the 
critical-section problem using techniques ranging from hardware to software-
based APis available to application programmers. All these solutions are based 
on the premise of locking; however, as we shall see, the designs of such locks 
can be quite sophisticated. 
We start by presenting some simple hardware instructions that are available 
on many systems and showing how they can be used effectively in solving the 
critical-section problem. Hardware features can make any programming task 
easier and improve system efficiency. 
The critical-section problem could be solved simply in a uniprocessor envi-
ronment if we could prevent interrupts from occurring while a shared variable 
was being modified. In this manner, we could be sure that the current sequence 
of instructions would be allowed to execute in order without preemption. No 
other instructions would be run, so no unexpected modifications could be 
made to the shared variable. This is often the approach taken by nonpreemptive 
kernels. 
Unfortunately, this solution is not as feasible in a multiprocessor environ-
ment. Disabling interrupts on a multiprocessor can be time consuming, as the 
boolean TestAndSet(boolean *target) { 
boolean rv = *target; 
*target = TRUE; 
return rv; 
} 
Figure 6.4 The definition of the TestAndSet () instruction. 

232 
Chapter 6 
do { 
while (TestAndSet(&lock)) 
; II do nothing 
II critical section 
lock = FALSE; 
II remainder section 
} while (TRUE); 
Figure 6.5 Mutual-exclusion implementation with TestAndSet (). 
message is passed to all the processors. This message passing delays entry into 
each critical section, and system efficiency decreases. Also consider the effect 
on a system's clock if the clock is kept updated by interrupts. 
Many modern computer systems therefore provide special hardware 
instructions that allow us either to test and modify the content of a word or 
to swap the contents of two words 
is, as one unin.terruptible 
unit. We can use these special instructions to solve the critical-section problem 
in a relatively simple manner. Rather than discussing one specific instruction 
for one specific machine, we abstract the main concepts behind these types of 
instructions by describing the TestAndSet () and Swap() instructions. 
The TestAndSet () instruction can be defined as shown in Figure 6.4. The 
important characteristic of this instruction is that it is executed atomically. 
Thus, if two TestAndSet () instructions are executed simultaneously (each on 
a different CPU), they will be executed sequentially in some arbitrary order. If 
the machine supports the TestAndSet () instruction, then we can implement 
mutual exclusion by declaring a Boolean variable lock, initialized to false. 
The structure of process P; is shown in Figure 6.5. 
The Swap() instruction, in contrast to the TestAndSet () instruction, 
operates on the contents of two words; it is defined as shown in Figure 6.6. 
Like the TestAndSet () instruction, it is executed atomically. If the machine 
supports the Swap() instruction, then mutual exclusion can be provided as 
follows. A global Boolean variable lock is declared and is initialized to false. 
In addition, each process has a local Boolean variable key. The structure of 
process P; is shown in Figure 6.7. 
Although these algorithms satisfy the mutual-exclusion requirement, they 
do not satisfy the bounded-waiting requirement. In Figure 6.8, we present 
another algorithm using the TestAndSet () instruction that satisfies all the 
critical-section requirements. The common data structures are 
void Swap(boolean *a, boolean *b) { 
boolean temp = *a; 
*a 
*b; 
*b = temp; 
} 
Figure 6.6 The definition of the Swap () instruction. 

6.4 
do { 
key = TRUE; 
while (key == TRUE) 
Swap(&lock, &key); 
II critical section 
lock = FALSE; 
II remainder section 
} while (TRUE); 
Figure 6.7 Mutual-exclusion implementation with the Swap() instruction. 
boolean waiting[n]; 
boolean lock; 
233 
These data structures are initialized to false. To prove that the mutual-
exclusion requirement is met, we note that process P; can enter its critical 
section only if either waiting [i] == false or key == false. The value 
of key can become false only if the TestAndSet () is executed. The first 
process to execute the TestAndSet () will find key== false; all others must 
wait. The variable waiting [i] can become false only if another process 
leaves its critical section; only one waiting [i] is set to false, maintaining the 
mutual-exclusion requirement. 
do { 
waiting[i] = TRUE; 
key = TRUE; 
while (waiting[i] && key) 
key= TestAndSet(&lock); 
waiting[i] = FALSE; 
II critical section 
j = (i + 1) % n; 
while ((j != i) && !waiting[j]) 
j = (j + 1) % n; 
if (j == i) 
lock = FALSE; 
else 
waiting[j] = FALSE; 
II remainder section 
} while (TRUE) ; 
Figure 6.8 Bounded-waiting mutual exclusion with TestAndSet (). 

234 
Chapter 6 
6.5 
To prove that the progress requirement is met, we note that the arguments 
presented for mutual exclusion also apply here, since a process exiting the 
critical section either sets lock to false or sets waiting[j] to false. Both 
allow a process that is waiting to enter its critical section to proceed. 
To prove that the bounded-waiting requirement is met, we note that, when 
a process leaves its critical section, it scans the array waiting in the cyclic 
ordering (i + 1, i + 2, ... , n 
1, 0, ... , i 
1). It designates the first process in this 
ordering that is in the entry section (waiting[j] ==true) as the next one to 
enter the critical section. Any process waiting to enter its critical section will 
thus do so within n - 1 turns. 
Unfortunately for hardware designers, implementing atomic TestAnd-
Set () instructions on multiprocessors is not a trivial task. Such implementa-
tions are discussed in books on computer architecture. 
The hardware-based solutions to the critical-section problem presented in 
Section 6.4 are complicated for application programmers to use. To overcmrte 
this difficulty, we can use a synchronization tool called a 
A semaphore S is an integer variable that, apart from initialization, is 
accessed only through two standard atomic operations: wait () and signal (). 
The wait () operation was originally termed P (from the Dutch proberen, "to 
test"); signal() was originally called V (from verhogen, "to increment"). The 
definition of wait () is as follows: 
wait(S) { 
} 
while S <= 0 
II no-op 
s--· ' 
The definition of signal() is as follows: 
signal(S) { 
S++; 
} 
All modifications to the integer value of the semaphore in the wait () and 
signal() operations must be executed indivisibly. That is, when one process 
modifies the semaphore value, no other process can simultaneously modify 
that same semaphore value. In addition, in the case of wait (S), the testing of 
the integer value of S (S :S 0), as well as its possible modification (S--), must 
be executed without interruption. We shall see how these operations can be 
implemented in Section 6.5.2; first, let us see how semaphores can be used. 
6.5.1 Usage 
Operating systems often distinguish between counting and binary semaphores. 
The value of a counting semaphore can range over an unrestricted domain. 
The value of a binary semaphore can range only between 0 and 1. On some 

6.5 
235 
systems, binary semaphores are lmown as mutex locks, as they are locks that 
provide mutual exclusion. 
We can use binary semaphores to deal with the critical-section problem £or 
mlJltiple processes. Then processes share a semaphore, mutex, initialized to 1. 
Each process Pi is organized as shown in Figure 6.9. 
Counting semaphores can be used to control access to a given resource 
consisting of a finite number o£ instances. The semaphore is initialized to the 
number of resources available. Each process that wishes to use a resource 
performs a wait() operation on the semaphore (thereby decrementing the 
count). When a process releases a resource, it performs a signal() operation 
(incrementing the count). When the count for the semaphore goes to 0, all 
resources are being used. After that, processes that wish to use a resource will 
block until the count becomes greater than 0. 
We can also use semaphores to solve various synchronization problems. 
For example, consider two concurrently numing processes: P1 with a statement 
51 and P2 with a statement 52. Suppose we require that 52 be executed only 
after 51 has completed. We can implement this scheme readily by letting P1 
and P2 share a common semaphore synch, initialized to 0, and by inserting the 
statements 
51; 
signal(synch) ; 
in process P1 and the statements 
wait(synch); 
52; 
in process P2. Because synch is initialized to 0, P2 will execute 52 only after P1 
has invoked signal (synch), which is after statement 51 has been executed. 
6.5.2 Implementation 
The main disadvantage of the semaphore definition given here is thatit requires 
While a process is in its critical section, any other process that 
tries to enter its critical section must loop continuously in the entry code. This 
continual looping is clearly a problem in a real multiprogramming system, 
do { 
wait (mutex) ; 
II critical section 
signal(mutex); 
II remainder section 
} while (TRUE); 
Figure 6.9 Mutual-exclusion implementation with semaphores. 

236 
Chapter 6 
where a single CPU is shared among ncany processes. Busy waiting wastes 
CPU cycles that some other process might be able to use productively. This 
type of semaphore is also called a 
because the process "spins" while 
waiting for the lock. (Spinlocks do have an advantage in that no context switch 
is required when a process must wait on a lock, and a context switch may 
take considerable time. Thus, when locks are expected to be held for short 
times, spinlocks are useful; they are often employed on multiprocessor systems 
where one thread can "spin" on one processor while another thread performs 
its critical section on another processor.) 
To overcome the need for busy waiting, we can modify the definition of 
the wait() and signal() semaphore operations. When a process executes the 
wait () operation and finds that the semaphore value is not positive, it must 
wait. However, rather than engaging in busy waiting, the process can block 
itself. The block operation places a process into a waiting queue associated 
with the semaphore, and the state of the process is switched to the waiting 
state. Then control is transferred to the CPU scheduler, which selects another 
process to execute. 
A process that is blocked, waiting on a semaphore S, should be restarted 
when some other process executes a signal() operation. The process is 
restarted by a wakeup () operation, which changes the process from the waiting 
state to the ready state. The process is then placed in the ready queue. (The 
CPU may or may not be switched from the running process to the newly ready 
process, depending on the CPU-scheduling algorithm.) 
To implement semaphores under this definition, we define a semaphore as 
a "C' struct: 
typedef struct { 
int value; 
struct process *list; 
} semaphore; 
Each semaphore has an integer value and a list of processes list. When 
a process must wait on a semaphore, it is added to the list of processes. A 
signal() operation removes one process from the list of waiting processes 
and awakens that process. 
The wait() semaphore operation can now be defined as 
wait(semaphore *S) { 
S->value--; 
} 
if (S->value < 0) { 
} 
add this process to S->list; 
block(); 
The signal () semaphore operation can now be defined as 

signal(semaphore *S) { 
S->value++; 
if (S->value <= 0) { 
6.5 
remove a process P fron< S->list; 
wakeup(P); 
} 
} 
237 
The block() operation suspends the process that invokes it. The wakeup(P) 
operation resumes the execution of a blocked process P. These two operations 
are provided by the operating system as basic system calls. 
Note that in this implementation, semaphore values may be negative, 
although semaphore values are never negative under the classical definition of 
semaphores with busy waiting. If a semaphore value is negative, its magnitude 
is the number of processes waiting on that semaphore. This fact results from 
switching the order of the decrement and the test in the implementation of the 
wait () operation. 
The list of waiting processes can be easily implemented by a link field in 
each process control block (PCB). Each semaphore contains an integer value and 
a pointer to a list of PCBs. One way to add and rernove processes from the list 
so as to ensure bounded waiting is to use a FIFO queue, where the semaphore 
contains both head and tail pointers to the queue. In general, howeve1~ the list 
can use any queueing strategy. Correct usage of semaphores does not depend 
on a particular queueing strategy for the semaphore lists. 
It is critical that semaphores be executed atomically. We must guarantee 
that no two processes can execute wait() and signal() operations on the 
same semaphore at the same time. This is a critical-section problem; and 
in a single-processor environment (that is, where only one CPU exists), we 
can solve it by simply inhibiting interrupts during the time the wait() and 
signal() operations are executing. This scheme works in a single-processor 
environment because, once interrupts are inhibited, instructions from different 
processes cannot be interleaved. Only the currently running process executes 
until interrupts are reenabled and the scheduler can regain control. 
In a multiprocessor environment, interrupts must be disabled on every 
processor; otherwise, instructions from different processes (running on differ-
ent processors) may be interleaved in some arbitrary way. Disabling interrupts 
on every processor can be a difficult task and furthermore can seriously dimin-
ish performance. Therefore, SMP systems must provide alternative locking 
techniques-such as spinlocks-to ensure that wait() and signal() are 
performed atomically. 
It is important to admit that we have not completely eliminated busy 
waiting with this definition of the wait () and signal () operations. Rather, 
we have moved busy waiting from the entry section to the critical sections 
of application programs. Furthermore, we have limited busy waiting to the 
critical sections of the wait () and signal () opera times, and these sections are 
short (if properly coded, they sbould be no more than about ten instructions). 
Thus, the critical section is almost never occupied, and busy waiting occurs 
rarely, and then for only a short time. An entirely different situation exists 
with application programs whose critical sections may be long (minutes or 

238 
Chapter 6 
even hours) or may almost always be occupied. In such casesf busy waiting is 
extremely inefficient. 
6.5.3 Deadlocks and Starvation 
The implementation of a semaphore with a waiting queue may result in a 
situation where two or more processes are waiting indefinitely for an event 
that can be caused only by one of the waiting processes. The event in question 
is the execution of a signal() 
When such a state is reached, these 
processes are said to be 
To illustrate this, we consider a system consisting of two processes, Po and 
P1, each accessing two semaphores, S and Q, set to the value 1: 
Po 
wait(S); 
wait(Q); 
signal(S); 
signal(Q); 
pl 
wait(Q); 
wait(S); 
signal(Q); 
signal(S); 
Suppose that Po executes wait (S) and then P1 executes wait (Q). When Po 
executes wait (Q), it must wait until P1 executes signal (Q). Similarly, when 
P1 executes wait (S), it must wait until Po executes signal(S). Since these 
signal() operations cam1ot be executed, Po and P1 are deadlocked. 
We say that a set of processes is in a deadlock state when every process 
in the set is waiting for an event that can be caused only by another process 
in the set. The events with which we are mainly concerned here are resource 
acquisition and release. However, other types of events may result in deadlocks, 
as we show in Chapter 7. In that chapter, we describe various mechanisms for 
dealing with the deadlock problem. 
Another problem related to deadlocks is 
or 
a situation in which processes wait indefinitely within the semaphore. 
Indefinite blocking may occur if we remove processes from the list associated 
with a semaphore in LIFO (last-in, first-out) order. 
6.5.4 Priority Inversion 
A scheduling challenge arises when a higher-priority process needs to read 
or modify kernel data that are currently being accessed by a lower-priority 
process-or a chain of lower-priority processes. Since kernel data are typically 
protected with a lock, the higher-priority process will have to wait for a 
lower-priority one to finish with the resource. The situation becomes more 
complicated if the lower-priority process is preempted in favor of another 
process with a higher priority. As an example, assume we have three processes, 
Lf M, and H, whose priorities follow the order L < M < H. Assume that 
process H requires resource R, which is currently being accessed by process L. 
Ordinarily, process H would wait for L to finish using resource R. However, 
now suppose that process M becomes runnable, thereby preempting process 

6.6 
6.6 
239 
PRIORITY INVERSION AND THE MARS PATHFINDER 
Priority inversion can be more than a scheduling inconvenience. On systems 
with tight time constraints (such as real-time systems-see Chapter 19), 
priority inversion can cause a process to take longer than it should to 
accomplish a task. When that happens, other failures can cascade, resulting 
in system failure. 
Consider the Mars Pathfinde1~ a NASA space probe that landed a robot, the 
Sojourner rove1~ on Mars in 1997 to conduct experiments. Shortly after the 
Sojourner began operating, it started to experience frequent computer resets. 
Each reset reinitialized all hardware and software, including communica-
tions. If the problem had not been solved, the Sojourner would have failed in 
its mission. 
The problem was caused by the fact that one high-priority task, "bcdist," 
was taking longer than expected to complete its work. This task was being 
forced to wait for a shared resource that was held by the lower-priority 
"ASI/MET" task, which in turn was preempted by multiple medium-priority 
tasks. The "bcdist" task would stall waiting for the shared resource, and 
ultimately the "bc_sched" task would discover the problem and perform the 
reset. The Sojourner was suffering from a typical case of priority inversion. 
The operating system on the Sojourner was VxWorks (see Section 19.6), 
which had a global variable to enable priority inheritance on all semaphores. 
After testing, the variable was set on the Sojourner (on Mars!), and the 
problem was solved. 
A full description of the problem, its detection, and its solu-
tion was written by the software team lead and is available at 
research.microsoft.com/ mbj /MarsYathfinder I Authoritative_Account.html. 
L. Indirectly, a process with a lower priority-process M-has affected how 
long process H must wait for L to relinquish resource R. 
This problem is known as 
It occurs only in systems with 
more than two priorities, so one solution is to have only two priorities. That is 
insufficient for most general-purpose operating systems, however. Typically 
these systems solve the problem by implementing a 
2Tic?x,u" 
:. According to this protocol, all processes that are accessing resources 
needed by a higher-priority process inherit the higher priority until they are 
finished with the resources in question. When they are finished, their priorities 
revert to their original values. In the exan1.ple above, a priority-inheritance 
protocol would allow process L to temporarily inherit the priority of process 
H, thereby preventing process M from preempting its execution. When process 
L had finished using resource R, it would relinquish its inherited priority from 
Hand assume its original priority. Because resource R would now be available, 
process H-not M-would run next. 
In this section, we present a number of synchronization problems as examples 
of a large class of concurrency-control problems. These problems are used for 

240 
Chapter 6 
do { 
II produce an item in nextp 
wait(empty); 
wait(mutex); 
II add nextp to buffer 
signal(mutex); 
signal(full); 
} while (TRUE); 
Figure 6.10 The structure of the producer process. 
testing nearly every newly proposed synchronization scheme. In our solutions 
to the problems, we use semaphores for synchronization. 
6.6.1 The Bounded-Buffer Problem 
The bounded-buffer problem was introduced in Section 6.1; it is commonly used 
to illustrate the power of synchronization primitives. Here, we present a 
general structure of this scheme without committing ourselves to any particular 
implementation; we provide a related programming project in the exercises at 
the end of the chapter. 
We assume that the pool consists of n buffers, each capable of holding 
one item. The mutex semaphore provides mutual exclusion for accesses to the 
buffer pool and is initialized to the value 1. The empty and full semaphores 
comct the number of empty and full buffers. The semaphore empty is initialized 
to the value n; the semaphore full is initialized to the value 0. 
The code for the producer process is shown in Figure 6.10; the code for 
the consumer process is shown in Figure 6.11. Note the symmetry between 
the producer and the consumer. We can interpret this code as the producer 
producing full buffers for the consumer or as the consumer producing empty 
buffers for the producer. 
do { 
wait (full); 
wait (mutex) ; 
II remove an item from buffer to nextc 
signal(mutex); 
signal(empty); 
II consume the item in nextc 
} while (TRUE); 
Figure 6.11 The structure of the consumer process. 

6.6 
241 
6.6.2 The Readers-Writers Problem 
Suppose that a database is to be shared among several concurrent processes. 
Some of these processes may want only to read the database, whereas others 
may want to update (that is, to read and write) the database. We distinguish 
between these two types of processes by referring to the former as readers 
and to the latter as writers. Obviously, if two readers access the shared data 
simultaneously, no adverse effects will result. However, if a writer and some 
other process (either a reader or a writer) access the database simultaneously, 
chaos may ensue. 
To ensure that these difficulties do not arise, we require that the writers 
have exclusive access to the shared database while writing to the database. This 
synchronization problem is referred to as the readers-writers problem. Since it 
was originally stated, it has been used to test nearly every new synchronization 
primitive. The readers-writers problem has several variations, all involving 
priorities. The simplest one, referred to as the first readers-writers problem, 
requires that no reader be kept waiting unless a writer has already obtained 
permission to use the shared object. In other words, no reader should wait for 
other readers to finish simply because a writer is waiting. The second readers-
writers problem requires that, once a writer is ready, that writer performs its 
write as soon as possible. In other words, if a writer is waiting to access the 
object, no new readers may start reading. 
A solution to either problem may result in starvation. In the first case, 
writers may starve; in the second case, readers may starve. For this reason, 
other variants of the problem have been proposed. Next, we present a solution 
to the first readers-writers problem. Refer to the bibliographical notes at the 
end of the chapter for references describing starvation-free solutions to the 
second readers-writers problem. 
In the solution to the first readers-writers problem, the reader processes 
share the following data structures: 
semaphore mutex, wrt; 
int readcount; 
The semaphores mutex and wrt are initialized to 1; readcount is initialized 
to 0. The semaphore wrt is common to both reader and writer processes. 
The mutex semaphore is used to ensure mutual exclusion when the variable 
readcount is updated. The readcount variable keeps track of how many 
processes are currently reading the object. The semaphore wrt functions as a 
mutual-exclusion semaphore for the writers. It is also used by the first or last 
reader that enters or exits the critical section. It is not used by readers who 
enter or exit while other readers are in their critical sections. 
The code for a writer process is shown in Figure 6.12; the code for a reader 
process is shown in Figure 6.13. Note that, if a writer is in the critical section 
and n readers are waiting, then one reader is queued on wrt, and n- 1 readers 
are queued on mutex. Also observe that, when a writer executes signal ( wrt), 
we may resume the execution of either the waiting readers or a single waiting 
writer. The selection is made by the scheduler. 
The readers-writers problem and its solutions have been generalized to 
provide 
locks on some systems. Acquiring a reader-writer lock 

242 
Chapter 6 
do { 
wait(wrt); 
II writing is performed 
signal(wrt); 
} while (TRUE); 
Figure 6. i 2 The structure of a writer process. 
requires specifying the mode of the lock either read or write access. When a 
process wishes only to read shared data, it requests the reader-writer lock 
in read mode; a process wishing to modify the shared data must request the 
lock in write mode. Multiple processes are permitted to concurrently acquire 
a reader-writer lock in read mode, but only one process may acquire the lock 
for writing, as exclusive access is required for writers. 
Reader-writer locks are most useful in the following situations: 
In applications where it is easy to identify which processes only read shared 
data and which processes only write shared data. 
In applications that have more readers than writers. This is because reader-
writer locks generally require more overhead to establish than semaphores 
or mutual-exclusion locks. The increased concurrency of allowing multiple 
readers compensates for the overhead involved in setting up the reader-
writer lock. 
6.6.3 The Dining-Philosophers Problem 
Consider five philosophers who spend their lives thinking and eating. The 
philosophers share a circular table surrounded by five chairs, each belonging 
do { 
wait (mutex); 
readcount++; 
if (readcount 
1) 
wait (wrt); 
signal(mutex); 
II reading is performed 
wait(mutex); 
readcount--; 
if (readcount 
0) 
signal(wrt); 
signal(mutex); 
} while (TRUE); 
Figure 6.13 The structure of a reader process. 

6.6 
243 
Figure 6.14 The situation of the dining philosophers. 
to one philosopher. In the center of the table is a bowl of rice, and the table is laid 
with five single chopsticks (Figure 6.14). When a philosopher thinks, she does 
not interact with her colleagues. From time to time, a philosopher gets hungry 
and tries to pick up the two chopsticks that are closest to her (the chopsticks 
that are between her and her left and right neighbors). A philosopher may pick 
up only one chopstick at a time. Obviously, she cam1ot pick up a chopstick that 
is already in the hand of a neighbor. When a htmgry philosopher has both her 
chopsticks at the same time, she eats without releasing her chopsticks. When 
she is finished eating, she puts down both of her chopsticks and starts thinking 
again. 
The dining-philosophers problem is considered a classic synchronization 
problem neither because of its practical importance nor because computer 
scientists dislike philosophers but because it is an example of a large class 
of concurrency-control problems. It is a simple representation of the need 
to allocate several resources among several processes in a deadlock-free and 
starvation-free mam1er. 
One simple solution is to represent each chopstick with a semaphore. A 
philosopher tries to grab a chopstick by executing await () operation on that 
semaphore; she releases her chopsticks by executing the signal() operation 
on the appropriate semaphores. Thus, the shared data are 
semaphore chopstick[5]; 
where all the elements of chopstick are initialized to 1. The structure of 
philosopher i is shown in Figure 6.15. 
Although this solution guarantees that no two neighbors are eating 
simultaneously, it nevertheless must be rejected because it could create a 
deadlock. Suppose that all five philosophers become hungry simultaneously 
and each grabs her left chopstick. All the elements of chopstick will now be 
equal to 0. When each philosopher tries to grab her right chopstick, she will be 
delayed forever. 
Several possible remedies to the deadlock problem are listed next. 
Allow at most four philosophers to be sitting simultaneously at the table. 

244 
Chapter 6 
6.7 
do { 
wait(chopstick[i]); 
wait(chopstick[(i+l) % 5]); 
I I eat 
signal(chopstick[i]); 
signal(chopstick[(i+l) % 5]); 
II think 
} while (TRUE); 
Figure 6.15 The structure of philosopher i. 
Allow a philosopher to pick up her chopsticks only if both chopsticks are 
available (to do this, she must pick them up in a critical section). 
Use an asymmetric solution; that is, an odd philosopher picks up first her 
left chopstick and then her right chopstick, whereas an even philosopher 
picks up her right chopstick and then her left chopstick 
In Section 6.7, we present a solution to the dining-philosophers problem 
that ensures freedom from deadlocks. Note, however, that any satisfactory 
solution to the dining-philosophers problem must guard against the possibility 
that one of the philosophers will starve to death. A deadlock-free solution does 
not necessarily eliminate the possibility of starvation. 
Although semaphores provide a convenient and effective mechanism for 
process synchronization, using them incorrectly can result in timing errors 
that are difficult to detect, since these errors happen only if some particular 
execution sequences take place and these sequences do not always occur. 
We have seen an example of such errors in the use of counters in our 
solution to the producer-consumer problem (Section 6.1). In that example, 
the timing problem happened only rarely, and even then the counter value 
appeared to be reasonable-off by only 1. Nevertheless, the solution is 
obviously not an acceptable one. It is for this reason that semaphores were 
introduced in the first place. 
Unfortunately, such timing errors can still occur when semaphores are 
used. To illustrate how, we review the semaphore solution to the critical-section 
problem. All processes share a semaphore variable mutex, which is initialized 
to 1. Each process must execute wait (mutex) before entering the critical section 
and signal (mutex) afterward. If this sequence is not observed, two processes 
may be in their critical sections simultaneously. Next, we examine the various 
difficulties that may result. Note that these difficulties will arise even if a 
single process is not well behaved. This situation may be caused by an honest 
programming error or an uncooperative programmer. 

7.1 
CH 
ER 
In a multiprogramming environment, several processes may compete for a 
finite number of resources. A process requests resources; if the resources are 
not available at that time, the process enters a waiting state. Sometimes, a 
waiting process is never again able to change state, because the resources it 
has requested are held by other waiting processes. This situation is called 
a deadlock We discussed this issue briefly in Chapter 6 in cmmection with 
semaphores. 
Perhaps the best illustration of a deadlock can be drawn from a law passed 
by the Kansas legislature early in the 20th century. It said, in part: "When two 
trains approach each other at a crossing, both shall come to a full stop and 
neither shall start up again until the other has gone." 
In this chapter, we describe methods that an operating system can use 
to prevent or deal with deadlocks. Although some applications can identify 
programs that may deadlock, operating systems typically do not provide 
deadlock-prevention facilities, and it remains the responsibility of program-
mers to ensure that they design deadlock-free programs. Deadlock problems 
can only become more common, given current trends, including larger num-
bers of processes, multithreaded programs, many more resources withirt a 
system, and an emphasis on long-lived file and database servers rather than 
batch systems. 
To develop a description of deadlocks, which prevent sets of concurrent 
processes from completing their tasks. 
To present a number of different methods for preventing or avoiding 
deadlocks in a computer system. 
A system consists of a finite number of resources to be distributed among 
a number of competing processes. The resources are partitioned into several 
283 

284 
Chapter 7 
types, each consisting of some number of identical instances. Memory space, 
CPU cycles, files, and I/0 devices (such as printers and DVD drives) are examples 
of resource types. If a system has two CPUs, then the resource type CPU has 
two instances. Similarly, the resource type printer may have five instances. 
If a process requests an instance of a resource type, the allocation of any 
instance of the type will satisfy the request. If it will not, then the instances are 
not identical, and the resource type classes have not been defined properly. For 
example, a system may have two printers. These two printers may be defined to 
be in the same resource class if no one cares which printer prints which output. 
However, if one printer is on the ninth floor and the other is in the basement, 
then people on the ninth floor may not see both printers as equivalent, and 
separate resource classes may need to be defined for each printer. 
A process must request a resource before using it and must release the 
resource after using it. A process may request as many resources as it requires 
to carry out its designated task. Obviously, the number of resources requested 
may not exceed the total number of resources available in the system. In other 
words, a process cannot request three printers if the system has only two. 
Under the normal mode of operation, a process may utilize a resource in 
only the following sequence: 
Request. The process requests the resource. If the request cannot be 
granted immediately (for example, if the resource is being used by another 
process), then the requesting process must wait until it can acquire the 
resource. 
Use. The process can operate on the resource (for example, if the resource 
is a printer, the process can print on the printer). 
Release. The process releases the resource. 
The request and release of resources are system calls, as explained in 
Chapter 2. Examples are the request() and release() device, open() and 
close() file, and allocate() and free() memory system calls. Request and 
release of resources that are not managed by the operating system can be 
accomplished through the wait() and signal() operations on semaphores 
or through acquisition and release of a mutex lock. For each use of a kernel-
managed resource by a process or thread, the operating system checks to 
make sure that the process has requested and has been allocated the resource. 
A system table records whether each resource is free or allocated; for each 
resource that is allocated, the table also records the process to which it is 
allocated. If a process requests a resource that is currently allocated to another 
process, it can be added to a queue of processes waiting for this resource. 
A set of processes is in a deadlocked state when every process in the set is 
waiting for an event that can be caused only by another process in the set. The 
events with which we are mainly concerned here are resource acquisition and 
release. The resources may be either physical resources (for example, printers, 
tape drives, memory space, and CPU cycles) or logical resources (for example, 
files, semaphores, and monitors). However, other types of events may result in 
deadlocks (for example, the IPC facilities discussed in Chapter 3). 
To illustrate a deadlocked state, consider a system with three CD RW drives. 
Suppose each of three processes holds one of these CD RW drives. If each process 

7.2 
7.2 
285 
now requests another drive, the three processes will be in a deadlocked state. 
Each is waiting for the event "CD RW is released," which can be caused only 
by one of the other waiting processes. This example illustrates a deadlock 
involving the same resource type. 
Deadlocks may also involve different resource types. For example, consider 
a system with one printer and one DVD drive. Suppose that process P; is holding 
the DVD and process Pi is holding the printer. If P; requests the printer and P1 
requests the DVD drive, a deadlock occurs. 
A programmer who is developing multithreaded applications must pay 
particular attention to this problem. Multithreaded programs are good candi-
dates for deadlock because multiple threads can compete for shared resources. 
In a deadlock, processes never finish executing, and system resources are tied 
up, preventing other jobs from starting. Before we discuss the various methods 
for dealing with the deadlock problem, we look more closely at features that 
characterize deadlocks. 
7.2.1 Necessary Conditions 
A deadlock situation can arise if the following four conditions hold simultane-
ously in a system: 
Mutual exclusion. At least one resource must be held in a nonsharable 
mode; that is, only one process at a time can use the resource. If another 
DEADLOCK WITH MUTEX LOCKS 
Let's see how deadlock can occur in a multithreaded Pthread program 
using mutex locks. The pthread....mutex_ini t () function initializes 
an unlocked mutex. Mutex locks are acquired and released using 
pthread....mutex_lock() 
and 
pthread....mutex_unlock (), 
respec-
tively. If a thread attempts to acquire a locked mutex, the call to 
pthread....mutex_lock 0 blocks the thread until the owner of the mutex 
lock invokes pthread....mutex_unlock (). 
Two mutex locks are created in the following code example: 
I* Create and initialize the mutex locks *I 
pthread....mutex_t first....mutex; 
pthread....mutex_t second_nmtex; 
pthread....mutex_ini t (&first....mutex, NULL) ; 
pthread....mutex_ini t (&second....mutex, NULL) ; 
Next, two threads-thread_one and thread_two-'-are created, and both 
these threads have access to both mutex locks. thread_one and thread_ two 
run in the functions do_work_one () and do_work_two (), respectively, as 
shown in Figure 7.1. 

286 
Chapter 7 
DEADLOCK WITH MUTEX LOCKS (Continued) 
I* thread_one runs in this function *I 
void *do_work_one(void *param) 
{ 
} 
pthread_mutex_lock(&first_mutex); 
pthread_mutex_lock(&second_mutex); 
I** 
* Do some work 
*I 
pthread_mutex:_unlock (&second_mutex) ; 
pthread_mutex_unlock(&first_mutex); 
pthread_exit ( 0) ; 
I* thread_two runs in this function *I 
void *do_work_two(void *param) 
{ 
} 
pthread_mutex_lock (&second_mutex) ; 
pthread_mutex_lock(&first_mutex); 
I** 
* Do some work 
*I 
pthread_mutex_unlock (&first_mutex) ; 
pthread_mutex_unlock (&second_mutex) ; 
pthread_exi t ( 0) ; 
Figure 7.1 
Deadlock example. 
In this example, thread_one attempts to acquire the mutex locks in the 
order (1) first_mutex, (2) second_mutex, while thread_two attempts to 
acquire the mutex locks in the order (1) second__mutex, (2) first_mutex. 
Deadlock is possible if thread_one acquires first __mutex while thread_ two 
aacquites second__mutex. 
Note that, even though deadlock is possible, it will not occur if thread_one 
is able to acquire and release the mutex locks for first_mutex and sec-
ond_mutex before thread_two attemptsto acquire the locks. This example 
illustrates a problem with handling deadlocks: it is difficult to identify and 
test for deadlocks that may occur only under certain circumstances. 
process requests that resource, the requesting process must be delayed 
until the resource has been released. 
Hold and wait. A process must be holding at least one resource and 
waiting to acquire additional resources that are cmrently being held by 
other processes. 

7.2 
287 
No preemption. Resources cannot be preempted; that is, a resource can 
be released only voluntarily by the process holding it, after that process 
has completed its task. 
Circular wait. A set { P0, Pl, ... , P11 } of waiting processes must exist such 
that Po is waiting for a resource held by P1, P1 is waiting for a resource 
held by P2, ... , Pn-1 is waiting for a resource held by P,v and P11 is waiting 
for a resource held by Po. 
We emphasize that all four conditions must hold for a deadlock to 
occur. The circular-wait condition implies the hold-and-wait condition, so the 
four conditions are not completely independent. We shall see in Section 7.4, 
however, that it is useful to consider each condition separately. 
7.2.2 Resource-Allocation Graph 
Deadlocks can be described more precisely in terms of a directed graph called 
a 
graph. This graph consists of a set of vertices V 
and a set of edges E. The set of vertices Vis partitioned into two different types 
of nodes: P == { P1, P2, ... , Pn}, the set consisting of all the active processes in the 
system, and R == {R1, R2, ... , RmL the set consisting of all resource types in the 
system. 
A directed edge from process g to resource type Rj is denoted by P; -+ Rj; 
it signifies that process P; has requested an instance of resource type Rj and 
is currently waiting for that resource. A directed edge from resource type Rj 
to process P; is denoted by R1 -+ P;; it signifies that an instance of resource 
type R1 has been allocated to process P;. A directed edge P; -+ Rj is called a 
edge; a directed edge R1 -+ P; is called an 
Pictorially we represent each process P; as a circle and each resource type 
Rj as a rectangle. Since resource type Ri may have more than one instance, we 
represent each such instance as a dot within the rectangle. Note that a request 
edge points to only the rectangle R1, whereas an assignment edge must also 
designate one of the dots in the rectangle. 
When process P; requests an instance of resource type Ri, a request edge 
is inserted in the resource-allocation graph. When this request can be fulfilled, 
the request edge is instantaneously transformed to an assignment edge. When 
the process no longer needs access to the resource, it releases the resource; as a 
result, the assignment edge is deleted. 
The resource-allocation graph shown in Figure 7.2 depicts the following 
situation. 
The sets P, K and E: 
o P == {P1, P2, P3} 
oR== {R1, R2, R3, ~} 
0 E == {Pl-+ RlF p2-+ R3F Rl-+ p2F R2-+ p2F R2-+ Pl, R3-+ P3} 
Resource instances: 
o One instance of resource type R1 
o Two instances of resource type R2 

288 
Chapter 7 
Figure 7.2 Resource-allocation graph. 
o One instance of resource type R3 
o Three instances of resource type ~ 
Process states: 
o Process P1 is holding an instance of resource type R2 and is waiting for 
an instance of resource type R1 . 
o Process P2 is holding an instance of R1 and an instance of R2 and is 
waiting for an instance of R3. 
o Process P3 is holding an instance of R3. 
Given the definition of a resource-allocation graph, it can be shown that, if 
the graph contains no cycles, then no process in the system is deadlocked. If 
the graph does contain a cycle, then a deadlock may exist. 
If each resource type has exactly one instance, then a cycle implies that a 
deadlock has occurred. If the cycle involves only a set of resource types, each 
of which has only a single instance, then a deadlock has occurred. Each process 
involved in the cycle is deadlocked. In this case, a cycle in the graph is both a 
necessary and a sufficient condition for the existence of deadlock. 
If each resource type has several instances, then a cycle does not necessarily 
imply that a deadlock has occurred. In this case, a cycle in. the graph is a 
necessary but not a sufficient condition for the existence of deadlock. 
To illustrate this concept, we return to the resource-allocation graph 
depicted in Figure 7.2. Suppose that process P3 requests an instance of resource 
type R2. Since no resource instance is currently available, a request edge P3 ---+ 
R2 is added to the graph (Figure 7.3). At this point, two minimal cycles exist in 
the system: 
P1 ---+ R 1 ---+ P2 ---+ R3 ---+ P3 ---+ R2 ---+ P1 
P2 ---+ R3 ---+ P3 ---+ R2 ---+ P2 

7.2 Deadlock Characterization 
289 
Figure 7.3 Resource-allocation graph with a deadlock. 
Processes P1, Pz, and P3 are deadlocked. Process Pz is waiting for the resource 
R3, which is held by process P3. Process P3 is waiting for either process P1 or 
process Pz to release resource R2. In addition, process P1 is waiting for process 
Pz to release resource R1. 
Now consider the resource-allocation graph in Figure 7.4. In this example, 
we also have a cycle: 
However, there is no deadlock. Observe that process P4 may release its instance 
of resource type R2. That resource can then be allocated to P3, breaking the cycle. 
In summary, if a resource-allocation graph does not have a cycle, then the 
system is not in a deadlocked state. If there is a cycle, then the system may or 
may not be in a deadlocked state. This observation is important when we deal 
with the deadlock problem. 
Figure 7.4 Resource-allocation graph with a cycle but no deadlock. 

290 
Chapter 7 
7.3 
Generally speaking, we can deal with the deadlock problem in one of three 
ways: 
We can use a protocol to prevent or avoid deadlocks, ensuring that the 
system will never enter a deadlocked state. 
We can allow the system to enter a deadlocked state, detect it, and recover. 
We can ignore the problem altogether and pretend that deadlocks never 
occur in the system. 
The third solution is the one used by most operating systems, including UNIX 
and Windows; it is then up to the application developer to write programs that 
handle deadlocks. 
Next, we elaborate briefly on each of the three methods for handling 
deadlocks. Then, in Sections 7.4 through 7.7, we present detailed algorithms. 
Before proceeding, we should mention that some researchers have argued that 
none of the basic approaches alone is appropriate for the entire spectrum of 
resource-allocation problems in operating systems. The basic approaches can 
be combined, however, allowing us to select an optimal approach for each class 
of resources in a system. 
To ensure that deadlocks never occur, the 
prevention or a deadlock-avoidance scheme. 
provides 
a set of methods for ensuring that at least one of the necessary conditions 
(Section 7.2.1) cannot hold. These methods prevent deadlocks by constraining 
how requests for resources can be made. We discuss these methods in 
Section 7.4. 
requires that the operating system be given in 
advance additional information concerning which resources a process will 
request and use during its lifetime. With this additional knowledge, it can 
decide for each request whether or not the process should wait. To decide 
whether the current request can be satisfied or must be delayed, the system 
must consider the resources currently available, the resources currently allo-
cated to each process, and the future requests and releases of each process. We 
discuss these schemes in Section 7.5. 
If a system does not employ either a deadlock-prevention or a deadlock-
avoidance algorithm, then a deadlock situation may arise. In this environment, 
the system can provide an algorithm that examines the state of the system to 
determine whether a deadlock has occurred and an algorithm to recover from 
the deadlock (if a deadlock has indeed occurred). We discuss these issues in 
Section 7.6 and Section 7.7. 
In the absence of algorithms to detect and recover from deadlocks, we may 
arrive at a situation in which the system is in a deadlock state yet has no way 
of recognizing what has happened. In this case, the undetected deadlock will 
result in deterioration of the system's performance, because resources are being 
held by processes that cannot run and because more and more processes, as 
they make requests for resources, will enter a deadlocked state. Eventually, the 
system will stop functioning and will need to be restarted manually. 

7.4 
7.4 
291 
Although this method may not seem to be a viable approach to the deadlock 
problem, it is nevertheless used in most operating systems, as mentioned 
earlier. In many systems, deadlocks occur infrequently (say, once per year); 
thus, this method is cheaper than the prevention, avoidance, or detection and 
recovery methods, which must be used constantly. Also, in some circumstances, 
a system is in a frozen state but not in a deadlocked state. We see this situation, 
for example, with a real-time process running at the highest priority (or any 
process running on a nonpreemptive scheduler) and never returning control 
to the operating system. The system must have manual recovery methods for 
such conditions and may simply use those techniques for deadlock recovery. 
As we noted in Section 7.2.1, for a deadlock to occur, each of the four necessary 
conditions must hold. By ensuring that at least one of these conditions cannot 
hold, we can prevent the occurrence of a deadlock. We elaborate on this 
approach by examining each of the four necessary conditions separately. 
7.4.1 
Mutual Exclusion 
The mutual-exclusion condition must hold for nonsharable resources. For 
example, a printer cannot be simultaneously shared by several processes. 
Sharable resources, in contrast, do not require mutually exclusive access and 
thus cannot be involved in a deadlock. Read-only files are a good example of 
a sharable resource. If several processes attempt to open a read-only file at the 
same time, they can be granted simultaneous access to the file. A process never 
needs to wait for a sharable resource. In general, however, we cannot prevent 
deadlocks by denying the mutual-exclusion condition, because some resources 
are intrinsically nonsharable. 
7.4.2 Hold and Wait 
To ensure that the hold-and-wait condition never occurs in the system, we must 
guarantee that, whenever a process requests a resource, it does not hold any 
other resources. One protocol that can be used requires each process to request 
and be allocated all its resources before it begins execution. We can implement 
this provision by requiring that system calls requesting resources for a process 
precede all other system calls. 
An alternative protocol allows a process to request resources only when it 
has none. A process may request some resources and use them. Before it can 
request any additional resources, however, it must release all the resources that 
it is currently allocated. 
To illustrate the difference between these two protocols, we consider a 
process that copies data from a DVD drive to a file on disk, sorts the file, and 
then prints the results to a printer. If all resources must be requested at the 
beginning of the process, then the process must initially request the DVD drive, 
disk file, and printer. It will hold the printer for its entire execution, even though 
it needs the printer only at the end. 
The second method allows the process to request initially only the DVD 
drive and disk file. It copies from the DVD drive to the disk and then releases 

292 
Chapter 7 
both the DVD drive and the disk file. The process must then again request the 
disk file and the printer. After copying the disk file to the printer, it releases 
these two resources and terminates. 
Both these protocols have two main disadvantages. First, resource utiliza-
tion may be low, since resources may be allocated but unused for a long period. 
In the example given, for instance, we can release the DVD drive and disk file, 
and then again request the disk file and printe1~ only if we can be sure that our 
data will remain on the disk file. Otherwise, we must request all resources at 
the beginning for both protocols. 
Second, starvation is possible. A process that needs several popular 
resources may have to wait indefinitely, because at least one of the resources 
that it needs is always allocated to some other process. 
7.4.3 No Preemption 
The third necessary condition for deadlocks is that there be no preemption 
of resources that have already been allocated. To ensure that this condition 
does not hold, we can use the following protocol. If a process is holding 
some resources and requests another resource that cannot be immediately 
allocated to it (that is, the process must wait), then all resources the process is 
currently holding are preempted. In other words, these resources are implicitly 
released. The preempted resources are added to the list of resources for which 
the process is waiting. The process will be restarted only when it can regain its 
old resources, as well as the new ones that it is requesting. 
Alternatively, if a process requests some resources, we first check whether 
they are available. If they are, we allocate them. If they are not, we check 
whether they are allocated to some other process that is waiting for additional 
resources. If so, we preempt the desired resources from the waiting process and 
allocate them to the requesting process. If the resources are neither available 
nor held by a waiting process, the requesting process must wait. While it is 
waiting, some of its resources may be preempted, but only if another process 
requests them. A process can be restarted only when it is allocated the new 
resources it is requesting and recovers any resources that were preempted 
while it was waiting. 
This protocol is often applied to resources whose state can be easily saved 
and restored later, such as CPU registers and memory space. It cannot generally 
be applied to such resources as printers and tape drives. 
7 .4.4 Circular Wait 
The fourth and final condition for deadlocks is the circular-wait condition. One 
way to ensure that this condition never holds is to impose a total ordering of 
all resource types and to require that each process requests resources in an 
increasing order of enumeration. 
To illustrate, we let R = { R1, R2, ... , Rm} be the set of resource types. We 
assign to each resource type a unique integer number, which allows us to 
compare two resources and to determine whether one precedes another in our 
ordering. Formally, we define a one-to-one hmction F: R ___,. N, where N is the 
set of natural numbers. For example, if the set of resource types R includes 
tape drives, disk drives, and printers, then the function F might be defined as 
follows: 

7.4 
F (tape drive) = 1 
F (disk drive) = 5 
F (printer) = 12 
293 
We can now consider the following protocol to prevent deadlocks: Each 
process can request resources only in an increasing order of enumeration. That 
is, a process can initially request any number of instances of a resource type 
-say, R;. After that, the process can request instances of resource type Rj if 
and only if F(Rj) > F(R;). For example, using the function defined previously, 
a process that wants to use the tape drive and printer at the same time must 
first request the tape drive and then request the printer. Alternatively, we can 
require that a process requesting an instance of resource type Rj must have 
released any resources R; such that F(Ri) ::=:: F(Rj). It must also be noted that if 
several iilstances of the same resource type are needed, a single request for all 
of them must be issued. 
If these two protocols are used, then the circular-wait condition cannot 
hold. We can demonstrate this fact by assuming that a circular wait exists 
(proof by contradiction). Let the set of processes involved in the circular wait be 
{ P0, P1, ... , P11 }, where Pi is waiting for a resource R;, which is held by process 
Pi+l· (Modulo arithmetic is used on the indexes, so that P 11 is waiting for 
a resource R11 held by P0 .) Then, since process Pi+l is holding resource Ri 
while requesting resource Ri+l' we must have F(Ri) < F(R;H) for all i. But 
this condition means that F(Ro) < F(R1) < ... < F(R11) < F (Ro). By transitivity, 
F(Ro) < F(Ro), which is impossible. Therefore, there can be no circular wait. 
We can accomplish this scheme in an application program by developing 
an ordering among all synchronization objects in the system. All requests for 
synchronization objects must be made in increasing order. For example, if the 
lock ordering in the Pthread program shown in Figure 7.1 was 
F (first_mutex) = 1 
F (second_mutex) = 5 
then thread_ two could not request the locks out of order. 
Keep in mind that developing an ordering, or hierarchy, does not in itself 
prevent deadlock. It is up to application developers to write programs that 
follow the ordering. Also note that the function F should be defined according 
to the normal order of usage of the resources in a system. For example, because 
the tape drive is usually needed before the printer, it would be reasonable to 
define F(tape drive) < F(printer). 
Although ensuring that resources are acquired in the proper order is the 
responsibility of application developers, certain software can be used to verify 
that locks are acquired in the proper order and to give appropriate warnings 
when locks are acquired out of order and deadlock is possible. One lock-order 
verifier, which works on BSD versions of UNIX such as FreeBSD, is known as 
witness. Witness uses mutual-exclusion locks to protect critical sections, as 
described in Chapter 6; it works by dynamically maintaining the relationship 
of lock orders in a system. Let's use the program shown in Figure 7.1 as an 
example. Assume that thread_one is the first to acquire the locks and does so in 
the order (1) first_mutex, (2) second_mutex. Wih1ess records the relationship 
that first_mutex must be acquired before second_mutex. If thread_two later 

294 
Chapter 7 
7.5 
acquires the locks out of order, witness generates a warning message on the 
system console. 
It is also important to note that imposing a lock ordering does not guarantee 
deadlock prevention if locks can be acquired dynamically. For example, assume 
we have a function that transfers funds between two accounts. To prevent a 
race condition, each account has an associated semaphore that is obtained from 
a get Lock () function such as the following: 
void transaction(Account from, Account to, double amount) 
{ 
} 
Semaphore lock1, lock2; 
lock1 
getLock(from); 
lock2 = getLock(to); 
wait(lock1); 
wait(lock2); 
withdraw(from, amount); 
deposit(to, amount); 
signal(lock2); 
signal (lock1) ; 
Deadlock is possible if two threads simultaneously invoke the trans action () 
function, transposing different accounts. That is, one thread might invoke 
transaction(checkingAccount, savingsAccount, 25); 
and another might invoke 
transaction(savingsAccount, checkingAccount, 50); 
We leave it as an exercise for students to fix this situation. 
Deadlock-prevention algorithms, as discussed in Section 7.4, prevent deadlocks 
by restraining how requests can be made. The restraints ensure that at least 
one of the necessary conditions for deadlock cannot occur and, hence, that 
deadlocks cannot hold. Possible side effects of preventing deadlocks by this 
method, however, are low device utilization and reduced system throughput. 
An alternative method for avoiding deadlocks is to require additional 
information about how resources are to be requested. For example, in a system 
with one tape drive and one printer, the system might need to know that 
process P will request first the tape drive and then the printer before releasing 
both resources, whereas process Q will request first the printer and then the 
tape drive. With this knowledge of the complete sequence of requests and 
releases for each process, the system can decide for each request whether or 
not the process should wait in order to avoid a possible future deadlock. Each 
request requires that in making this decision the system consider the resources 

7.5 Deadlock Avoidance 
295 
currently available, the resources currently allocated to each process, and the 
future requests and releases of each process. 
The various algorithms that use this approach differ in the amount and type 
of information required. The simplest and most useful model requires that each 
process declare the maximum number of resources of each type that it may need. 
Given this a priori information, it is possible to construct an algorithm that 
ensures that the system will never enter a deadlocked state. Such an algorithm 
defines the deadlock-avoidance approach. A deadlock-avoidance algorithm 
dynamically examines the resource-allocation state to ensure that a circular-
wait condition can never exist. The resource-allocation state is defined by the 
number of available and allocated resources and the maximum demands of 
the processes. In the following sections, we explore two deadlock-avoidance 
algorithms. 
7.5.1 Safe State 
A state is safe if the system can allocate resources to each process (up to its 
maximum) in some order and still avoid a deadlock. More formally, a system 
is in a safe state only if there exists a safe sequence. A sequence of processes 
<P1, P2, ... , Pn> is a safe sequence for the current allocation state if, for each 
Pi, the resource requests that Pi can still make can be satisfied by the currently 
available resources plus the resources held by all Pj, with j < i. In this situation, 
if the resources that Pi needs are not immediately available, then Pi can wait 
until all Pj have finished. When they have finished, Pi can obtain all of its 
needed resources, complete its designated task, return its allocated resources, 
and terminate. When Pi terminates, Pi+l can obtain its needed resources, and 
so on. If no such sequence exists, then the system state is said to be unsafe. 
A safe state is not a deadlocked state. Conversely, a deadlocked state is 
an unsafe state. Not all unsafe states are deadlocks, however (Figure 7.5). 
An unsafe state may lead to a deadlock. As long as the state is safe, the 
operating system can avoid unsafe (and deadlocked) states. In an unsafe state, 
the operating system cannot prevent processes from requesting resources in 
such a way that a deadlock occurs. The behavior of the processes controls 
unsafe states. 
Figure 7.5 Safe, unsafe, and deadlocked state spaces. 

296 
Chapter 7 Deadlocks 
To illustrate, we consider a system with twelve magnetic tape drives and 
three processes: Po, P1, and P2. Process Po requires ten tape drives, process P1 
may need as many as four tape drives, and process P2 may need up to nine tape 
drives. Suppose that, at time to, process Po is holding five tape drives, process 
P1 is holding two tape drives, and process P2 is holding two tape drives. (Thus, 
there are three free tape drives.) 
Maximum Needs 
Current Needs 
10 
4 
9 
5 
2 
2 
At time t0, the system is in a safe state. The sequence <P1, P0, P2> satisfies 
the safety condition. Process P1 can immediately be allocated all its tape drives 
and then return them (the system will then have five available tape drives); 
then process Po can get all its tape drives and return them (the system will then 
have ten available tape drives); and finally process P2 can get all its tape drives 
and return them (the system will then have all twelve tape drives available). 
A system can go from a safe state to an unsafe state. Suppose that, at time 
t1, process P2 requests and is allocated one more tape drive. The system is no 
longer in a safe state. At this point, only process P1 can be allocated all its tape 
drives. When it returns them, the system will have only four available tape 
drives. Since process Po is allocated five tape drives but has a maximum of ten, 
it may request five more tape drives. If it does so, it will have to wait, because 
they are unavailable. Similarly, process P2 may request six additional tape 
drives and have to wait, resulting in a deadlock. Our mistake was in granting 
the request from process P2 for one more tape drive. If we had made P2 wait 
until either of the other processes had finished and released its resources, then 
we could have avoided the deadlock. 
Given the concept of a safe state, we can define avoidance algorithms that 
ensure that the system will never deadlock. The idea is simply to ensure that the 
system will always remain in a safe state. Initially, the system is in a safe state. 
Whenever a process requests a resource that is currently available, the system 
must decide whether the resource can be allocated immediately or whether 
the process must wait. The request is granted only if the allocation leaves the 
system in a safe state. 
In this scheme, if a process requests a resource that is currently available, 
it may still have to wait. Thus, resource utilization may be lower than it would 
otherwise be. 
7.5.2 Resource-Allocation-Graph Algorithm 
If we have a resource-allocation system with only one instance of each resource 
type, we can use a variant of the resource-allocation graph defined in Section 
7.2.2 for deadlock avoidance. In addition to the request and assignment edges 
already described, we introduce a new type of edge, called a claim edge. 
A claim edge Pi ~ Rj indicates that process Pi may request resource Rj at 
some time in the future. This edge resembles a request edge in direction but is 
represented in the graph by a dashed line. When process Pi requests resource 

7.5 
297 
Figure 7.6 Resource-allocation graph for deadlock avoidance. 
R1, the claim edge P; -+ R1 is converted to a request edge. Similarly, when a 
resource R1 is released by P;, the assignment edge Rj -+ P; is reconverted to a 
claim edge P; -+ Rj. 
We note that the resources must be claimed a priori in the system. That is, 
before process P; starts executing, all its claim edges must already appear in 
the resource-allocation graph. We can relax this condition by allowing a claim 
edge P; -+ R1 to be added to the graph only if all the edges associated with 
process P; are claim edges. 
Now suppose that process P; requests resource Rj. The request can be 
granted only if converting the request edge P; -+ Rj to an assignment edge 
R1 -+ P; does not result in the formation of a cycle in the resource-allocation 
graph. We check for safety by using a cycle-detection algorithm. An algorithm 
for detecting a cycle in this graph requires an order of n2 operations, where n 
is the number of processes in the system. 
If no cycle exists, then the allocation of the resource will leave the system 
in a safe state. If a cycle is found, then the allocation will put the system in 
an unsafe state. In that case, process P; will have to wait for its requests to be 
satisfied. 
To illustrate this algorithm, we consider the resource-allocation graph of 
Figure 7.6. Suppose that P2 requests R2 . Although R2 is currently free, we 
cannot allocate it to P2, since this action will create a cycle in the graph (Figure 
7.7). A cycle, as mentioned, indicates that the system is in an unsafe state. If P1 
requests R2, and P2 requests R1, then a deadlock will occur. 
Figure 7.7 An unsafe state in a resource-allocation graph. 

298 
Chapter 7 
7.5.3 Banker's Algorithm 
The resource-allocation-graph algorithm is not applicable to a resource-
allocation system with multiple instances of each resource type. The deadlock-
avoidance algorithm that we describe next is applicable to such a system but 
is less efficient than the resource-allocation graph scheme. This algorithm is 
commonly known as the banker's algorithm. The name was chosen because the 
algorithm. could be used in a banking system to ensure that the bank never 
allocated its available cash in such a way that it could no longer satisfy the 
needs of all its customers. 
When a new process enters the system, it must declare the maximum 
number of instances of each resource type that it may need. This nun1.ber may 
not exceed the total number of resources in the system. When a user requests 
a set of resources, the system must determine whether the allocation of these 
resources will leave the system in a safe state. If it will, the resources are 
allocated; otherwise, the process must wait until some other process releases 
enough resources. 
Several data structures must be maintained to implement the banker's 
algorithm. These data structures encode the state of the resource-allocation 
system. We need the following data structures, where n is the number of 
processes in the system and m is the number of resource types: 
Available. A vector of length m indicates the number of available resources 
of each type. If Available[j] equals k, then k instances of resource type Ri 
are available. 
Max. An n x m matrix defines the maximum demand of each process. 
If Max[i] [j] equals k, then process P; may request at most k instances of 
resource type Ri. 
Allocation. An 11 x m matrix defines the number of resources of each type 
currently allocated to each process. If Allocation[i][j] equals lc, then process 
P; is currently allocated lc instances of resource type Rj. 
Need. An n x m matrix indicates the remaining resource need of each 
process. If Need[i][j] equals k, then process P; may need k more instances of 
resource type Ri to complete its task. Note that Need[i][j] equals Max[i][j] 
- Allocation [i][j]. 
These data structures vary over time in both size and value. 
To simplify the presentation of the banker's algorithm, we next establish 
some notation. Let X andY be vectors of length 11. We say that X::= Y if and 
only if X[i] ::= Y[i] for all i = 1, 2, ... , n. For example, if X = (1,7,3,2) and Y = 
(0,3,2,1), then Y ::=X. In addition, Y < X if Y ::=X andY# X. 
We can treat each row in the matrices Allocation and Need as vectors 
and refer to them as Allocation; and Need;. The vector Allocation; specifies 
the resources currently allocated to process P;; the vector Need; specifies the 
additional resources that process P; may still request to complete its task. 
7.5.3.1 
Safety Algorithm 
We can now present the algorithm for finding out whether or not a systern is 
in a safe state. This algorithm can be described as follows: 

7.5 
299 
Let Work and Finish be vectors of length m and n, respectively. Initialize 
Work= Available and Finish[i] =false for i = 0, 1, ... , n - 1. 
Find an index i such that both 
a. Finish[i] ==false 
b. Need; ::; Work 
If no such i exists, go to step 4. 
Work = Work + Allocation; 
Finish[i] = true 
Go to step 2. 
If Finish[i] ==true for all i, then the system is in a safe state. 
This algorithm may require an order of m x n2 operations to determine whether 
a state is safe. 
7.5.3.2 
Resource-Request Algorithm 
Next, we describe the algorithm for determining whether requests can be safely 
granted. 
Let Request; be the request vector for process P;. If Request; [j] == k, then 
process P; wants k instances of resource type Rj. When a request for resources 
is made by process P;, the following actions are taken: 
If Request; ::::; Need;, go to step 2. Otherwise, raise an error condition, since 
the process has exceeded its maximum claim. 
If Request; ::; Available, go to step 3. Otherwise, P; must wait, since the 
resources are not available. 
Have the system pretend to have allocated the requested resources to 
process P; by modifyil1.g the state as follows: 
Available= Available- Request;; 
Allocation; =Allocation; +Request;; 
Need; =Need;- Request;; 
If the resulting resource-allocation state is safe, the transaction is com-
pleted, and process P; is allocated its resources. However, if the new state 
is unsafe, then P; must wait for Request;, and the old resource-allocation 
state is restored. 
7.5.3.3 An Illustrative Example 
To illustrate the use of the banker's algorithm, consider a system with five 
processes Po through P4 and three resource types A, B, and C. Resource type A 
has ten instances, resource type B has five instances, and resource type C has 
seven instances. Suppose that, at time T0, the following snapshot of the system 
has been taken: 

300 
Chapter 7 
Allocation 
Max 
Available 
ABC 
ABC 
ABC 
Po 
010 
753 
332 
pl 
200 
322 
p2 
302 
902 
p3 
2 11 
222 
p4 
002 
433 
The content of the matrix Need is defined to be Max - Allocation and is as 
follows: 
Need 
ABC 
Po 
743 
pl 
122 
p2 
600 
p3 
011 
p4 
431 
We claim that the system is currently in a safe state. Indeed, the sequence 
< Plt P3, P4, P2, Po> satisfies the safety criteria. Suppose now that process 
P1 requests one additional instance of resource type A and two instances of 
resource type C, so Request1 = (1,0,2). To decide whether this request can be 
immediately granted, we first check that Request1 s Available-that is, that 
(1,0,2) s (3,3,2), which is true. We then pretend that this request has been 
fulfilled, and we arrive at the following new state: 
Allocation 
Need 
Available 
ABC 
ABC 
ABC 
Po 
010 
743 
230 
pl 
302 
020 
p2 
302 
600 
p3 
211 
0 11 
p4 
002 
431 
We must determine whether this new system state is safe. To do so, we 
execute our safety algorithm and find that the sequence <P1, P3, P4, Po, P2> 
satisfies the safety requirement. Hence, we can immediately grant the request 
of process P1. 
You should be able to see, however, that when the system is in this state, a 
request for (3,3,0) by P4 cannot be granted, since the resources are not available. 
Furthermore, a request for (0,2,0) by Po cannot be granted, even though the 
resources are available, since the resulting state is unsafe. 
We leave it as a programming exercise for students to implement the 
banker's algorithm. 

7.6 
7.6 
301 
If a system does not employ either a deadlock-prevention or a deadlock-
avoidance algorithm, then a deadlock situation may occur. In this environment, 
the system may provide: 
An algorithm that examines the state of the system to determine whether 
a deadlock has occurred 
An algorithm to recover from the deadlock 
In the following discussion, we elaborate on these two requirements as they 
pertain to systems with only a single instance of each resource type, as well as to 
systems with several instances of each resource type. At this point, however, we 
note that a detection-and-recovery scheme requires overhead that includes not 
only the run-time costs of maintaining the necessary information and executing 
the detection algorithm but also the potential losses inherent in recovering from 
a deadlock. 
7.6.1 Single Instance of Each Resource Type 
If all resources have only a single instance, then we can define a deadlock-
detection algorithm that uses a variant of the resource-allocation graph, called 
a wait-for graph. We obtain this graph from the resource-allocation graph by 
removing the resource nodes and collapsing the appropriate edges. 
More precisely, an edge from Pi to Pi in a wait-for graph implies that 
process Pz is waiting for process P1 to release a resource that P; needs. An edge 
Pz --+ Pi exists iil a wait-for graph if and only if the corresponding resource-
allocation graph contains two edges Pz --+ Rq and Rq --+ Pi for some resource 
Rq. For example, in Figure 7.8, we present a resource-allocation graph and the 
corresponding wait-for graph. 
As before, a deadlock exists in the system if and only if the wait-for graph 
contains a cycle. To detect deadlocks, the system needs to maintain the wait-for 
graph and periodically invoke an algorithm that searches for a cycle in the graph. 
An algorithm to detect a cycle in a graph requires an order of n2 operations, 
where n is the number of vertices in the graph. 
7.6.2 Several Instances of a Resource Type 
The wait-for graph scheme is not applicable to a resource-allocation system 
with multiple instances of each resource type. We turn now to a deadlock-
detection algorithm that is applicable to such a system. The algorithm employs 
several time-varying data structures that are similar to those used in the 
banker's algorithm (Section 7.5.3): 
Available. A vector of length nz indicates the number of available resources 
of each type. 
Allocation. Ann x nz matrix defines the number of resources of each type 
currently allocated to each process. 

302 
Chapter 7 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 7.8 (a) Resource-allocation graph. (b) Corresponding wait-for graph. 
Request. An n x m matrix indicates the current request of each process. 
If Request[i][j] equals k, then process P; is requesting k more instances of 
resource type Rj. 
The:::: relation between two vectors is defined as in Section 7.5.3. To simplify 
notation, we again treat the rows in the matrices Allocation and Request as 
vectors; we refer to them as Allocation; and Request;. The detection algorithm 
described here simply investigates every possible allocation sequence for the 
processes that remain to be completed. Compare this algorithm with the 
banker's algorithm of Section 7.5.3. 
Let Work and Finish be vectors of length m and n, respectively. Initialize 
Work= Available. Fori= 0, 1, ... , n-1, if Allocation; # 0, then Finish[i] =false; 
otherwise, Finish[i] = tme. 
2. Find an index i such that both 
a. Finish[i] ==false 
b. Request; :::: Work 
If no such i exists, go to step 4. 
Work= Work+ Allocation; 
Finish[i] = true 
Go to step 2. 
4. If Finish[i] ==false for some i, 0 :::: i < n, then the system is in a deadlocked 
state. Moreover, if Finish[i] ==false, then process P; is deadlocked. 
This algorithm requires an order o£ m x n2 operations to detect whether the 
system is in a deadlocked state. 

7.6 
303 
You may wonder why we reclaim the resources of process P; (in step 3) 
as soon as we determine that Request; :S Work (in step 2b). We know that P; 
is currently not involved in a deadlock (since Request; :S Work). Thus, we take 
an optimistic attitude and assume that P; will require no more resources to 
complete its task; it will thus soon return all currently allocated resources to 
the system. If our assumption is incorrect, a deadlock may occur later. That 
deadlock will be detected the next tince the deadlock-detection algorithm is 
invoked. 
To illustrate this algorithm, we consider a system with five processes Po 
through P4 and three resource types A, B, and C. Resource type A has seven 
instances, resource type B has two instances, and resource type C has six 
instances. Suppose that, at time T0, we have the following resource-allocation 
state: 
Allocation 
Request 
Available 
ABC 
ABC 
ABC 
Po 
0 1 0 
000 
000 
pl 
200 
202 
p2 
303 
000 
p3 
2 11 
100 
p4 
002 
002 
We claim that the system is not in a deadlocked state. Indeed, if we execute 
our algorithm, we will find that the sequence <Po, P2, P3, Plt P4> results in 
Finish[i] == true for all i. 
Suppose now that process P2 makes one additional request for an instance 
of type C. The Request matrix is modified as follows: 
Request 
ABC 
Po 
000 
pl 
202 
p2 
001 
p3 
100 
p4 
002 
We claim that the system is now deadlocked. Although we can reclaim the 
resources held by process Po, the number of available resources is not sufficient 
to fulfill the requests of the other processes. Thus, a deadlock exists, consisting 
of processes P1, P2, P3, and P4. 
7.6.3 Detection-Algorithm Usage 
When should we invoke the detection algorithm? The answer depends on two 
factors: 
1. How often is a deadlock likely to occur? 
How many processes will be affected by deadlock when it happens? 

304 
Chapter 7 
7.7 
If deadlocks occur frequently, then the detection algorithm should be invoked 
frequently. Resources allocated to deadlocked processes will be idle until the 
deadlock can be broken. In addition, the number of processes involved in the 
deadlock cycle may grow. 
Deadlocks occur only when some process makes a request that cannot be 
granted immediately. This request may be the final request that completes a 
chain of waiting processes. In the extreme, then, we can invoke the deadlock-
detection algorithm every time a request for allocation cannot be granted 
immediately. In this case, we can identify not only the deadlocked set of 
processes but also the specific process that "caused" the deadlock (In reality, 
each of the deadlocked processes is a link in the cycle in the resource graph, so 
all of them, jointly, caused the deadlock) If there are many different resource 
types, one request may create many cycles in the resource graph, each cycle 
completed by the most recent request and "caused" by the one identifiable 
process. 
Of course, invoking the deadlock-detection algorithm for every resource 
request will incur considerable overhead in computation time. A less expensive 
alternative is simply to invoke the algorithm at defined intervals-for example, 
once per hour or whenever CPU utilization drops below 40 percent. (A deadlock 
eventually cripples system throughput and causes CPU utilization to drop.) If 
the detection algorithm is invoked at arbitrary points in time, the resource 
graph may contain many cycles. In this case, we generally cannot tell which of 
the many deadlocked processes "caused" the deadlock 
When a detection algorithm determines that a deadlock exists, several alter-
natives are available. One possibility is to inform the operator that a deadlock 
has occurred and to let the operator deal with the deadlock manually. Another 
possibility is to let the system recover from the deadlock automatically. There 
are two options for breaking a deadlock One is simply to abort one or more 
processes to break the circular wait. The other is to preempt some resources 
from one or more of the deadlocked processes. 
7.7.1 Process Termination 
To eliminate deadlocks by aborting a process, we use one of two methods. In 
both methods, the system reclaims all resources allocated to the terminated 
processes. 
Abort all deadlocked processes. This method clearly will break the 
deadlock cycle, but at great expense; the deadlocked processes may have 
computed for a long time, and the results of these partial computations 
must be discarded and probably will have to be recomputed later. 
Abort one process at a time until the deadlock cycle is eliminated. This 
method incurs considerable overhead, since after each process is aborted, a 
deadlock-detection algorithnc rnust be invoked to determine whether any 
processes are still deadlocked. 

7.7 
305 
Aborting a process may not be easy. If the process was in the midst of 
updating a file, terminating it will leave that file in an incorrect state. Similarly, 
if the process was in the midst of printing data on a printer, the system must 
reset the printer to a correct state before printing the next job. 
If the partial termination method is used, then we must determine which 
deadlocked process (or processes) should be terminated. This determination is 
a policy decision, similar to CPU-scheduling decisions. The question is basically 
an economic one; we should abort those processes whose termination will incur 
the minimum cost. Unfortunately, the term minimum cost is not a precise one. 
Many factors may affect which process is chosen, including: 
1. What the priority of the process is 
2. How long the process has computed and how much longer the process 
will compute before completing its designated task 
How many and what types of resources the process has used (for example, 
whether the resources are simple to preempt) 
How many more resources the process needs in order to complete 
5. How many processes will need to be terminated 
Whether the process is interactive or batch 
7.7.2 Resource Preemption 
To eliminate deadlocks using resource preemption, we successively preempt 
some resources from processes and give these resources to other processes 1-m til 
the deadlock cycle is broken. 
If preemption is required to deal with deadlocks, then three issues need to 
be addressed: 
Selecting a victim. Which resources and which processes are to be 
preempted? As in process termil<ation, we must determine the order of 
preemption to minimize cost. Cost factors may include such parameters 
as the number of resources a deadlocked process is holding and the 
amount of time the process has thus far consumed during its execution. 
Rollback. If we preempt a resource from a process, what should be done 
with that process? Clearly, it cannot contil<ue with its normal execution; it 
is missing some needed resource. We must roll back the process to some 
safe state and restart it from that state. 
Since, in general, it is difficult to determine what a safe state is, the 
simplest solution is a total rollback: abort the process and then restart 
it. Although it is more effective to roll back the process only as far as 
necessary to break the deadlock, this method requires the system to keep 
more information about the state of all running processes. 
Starvation. How do we ensure that starvation will not occur? That is, 
how can we guarantee that resources will not always be preempted from 
the same process? 

306 
Chapter 7 
7.8 
In a system where victim selection is based primarily on cost factors, 
it may happen that the same process is always picked as a victim. As 
a result, this process never completes its designated task, a starvation 
situation that must be dealt with in any practical system. Clearly, we 
must ensure that a process can be picked as a victim" only a (small) finite 
number of times. The most common solution is to include the number of 
rollbacks in the cost factor. 
A deadlocked state occurs when two or more processes are waiting indefinitely 
for an event that can be caused only by one of the waiting processes. There are 
three principal methods for dealing with deadlocks: 
Use some protocol to prevent or avoid deadlocks, ensuring that the system 
will never enter a deadlocked state. 
Allow the system to enter a deadlocked state, detect it, and then recover. 
Ignore the problem altogether and pretend that deadlocks never occur in 
the system. 
The third solution is the one used by most operating systems, including UNIX 
and Windows. 
A deadlock can occur only if four necessary conditions hold simultaneously 
in the system: mutual exclusion, hold and wait, no preemption, and circular 
wait. To prevent deadlocks, we can ensure that at least one of the necessary 
conditions never holds. 
A method for avoiding deadlocks, rather than preventing them, requires 
that the operating system have a priori information about how each process 
will utilize system resources. The banker's algorithm, for example, requires 
a priori information about the maximunl. number of each resource class that 
each process may request. Using this information, we can define a deadlock-
avoidance algorithm. 
If a system does not employ a protocol to ensure that deadlocks will never 
occur, then a detection-and-recovery scheme may be employed. A deadlock-
detection algorithm must be invoked to detennine whether a deadlock 
has occurred. If a deadlock is detected, the system must recover either by 
terminating some of the deadlocked processes or by preempting resources 
from some of the deadlocked processes. 
Where preemption is used to deal with deadlocks, three issues must be 
addressed: selecting a victim, rollback, and starvation. In a system that selects 
victims for rollback primarily on the basis of cost factors, starvation may occur, 
and the selected process can never complete its designated task. 
Researchers have argued that none of the basic approaches alone is appro-
priate for the entire spectrum of resource-allocation problems in operating 
systems. The basic approaches can be combined, however, allowing us to select 
an optimal approach for each class of resources in a system. 
