3.1 
CHAPTER 
Early computer systems allowed only one program to be executed at a 
time. This program had complete control of the system and had access to 
all the system's resources. In contrast, current-day computer systems allow 
multiple programs to be loaded into memory and executed concurrently. 
This evolution required firmer control and more compartmentalization of the 
various programs; and these needs resulted in the notion of a process/ which is 
a program in execution. A process is the unit of work in a modern time-sharing 
system. 
The more complex the operating system is, the more it is expected to do on 
behalf of its users. Although its main concern is the execution of user programs, 
it also needs to take care of various system tasks that are better left outside the 
kernel itself. A system therefore consists of a collection of processes: operating-
system processes executing system code and user processes executing user 
code. Potentially/ all these processes can execute concurrently/ with the CPU (or 
CPUs) multiplexed among them. By switching the CPU between processes, the 
operating system can make the computer more productive. In this chapter/ you 
will read about what processes are and how they work. 
To introduce the notion of a process- a program in execution, which forms 
the basis of all computation. 
To describe the various features of processes, including scheduling, 
creation and termination, and communication. 
To describe communication in client-server systems. 
A question that arises in discussing operating systems involves what to call all 
the CPU activities,_f\_QCIJ:C:hJ3ystem~xeq_l_~§_LQQ.S_;.I'\'b§'X{C9::? _ 
_2l_!_i_!11_e:-::?_l<(it~ds_ys!~:r:tl 
has user programs, or tas~~- Even on a single-user system such as Microsoft 
101 

102 
Chapter 3 
Windows, a user may be able to run several programs at one time: a word 
processor, a Web browse1~ and an e-mail package. And even if the user can 
execute only one program at a time, the operating system may need to support 
its own internal programmed activities, such as memory management. In many 
respects, all these activities are similar, so we call all of them processes. 
_The ten:ns~Job i:!DQ pL~e~.s etif:'_lised almost interchangeably in this te)(t. 
Although we personally prefer the term process, much of operat1ng-system 
theory and terminology was developed during a time when the major activity 
of operating systems was job processing. It would be misleading to avoid 
the use of commonly accepted terms that include the word job (such as job 
scheduling) simply because process has superseded job. 
3.1.1 The Process 
Informally, as mentioned earlier, a process is a program in execution. A process 
is more than the program code, which is sometimes known as the text section. 
It also includes the current activity, as represented by the value of the program 
counter and the contents of the processor's registers. A process generally also 
includes the process stack, which contains temporary data (such as function 
parameters, return addresses, and local variables), and a data section, which 
contains global variables. A process may also include a heap, which is memory 
thatis dynamically allocated during process run time. The structure of a process 
in memory is shown in Figure 3.1. 
We emphasize that a program by itself is not a process; a program is a passive 
entity, such as a file containing a list of instructions stored on disk (often called 
an executable file), whereas a process is an active entity, with a program counter 
specifying the next instruction to execute and a set of associated resources. A 
program becomes a process when an executable file is loaded into memory. 
Two common techniques for loading executable files are double-clicking an 
icon representing the executable file and entering the name of the executable 
file on the command line (as in prog. exe or a. out.) 
0 
figure 3.1 
Process in memory.< 

3.1 
103 
1/0 or event completion 
Figure 3.2 Diagram of process state. 
Although two processes may be associated with the same program, they 
are nevertheless considered two separate execution sequences. For instance, 
several users may be running different copies of the mail program, or the same 
user may invoke many copies of the Web browser program. Each of these is a 
separate process; and although the text sections are equivalent, the data, heap, 
and stack sections vary. It is also common to have a process that spawns many 
processes as it runs. We discuss such matters in Section 3.4. 
3.1.2 Process State 
As a proces::; excr:utes, it changes state. The state of a process is defil1.ed in 
part by the current activity of that process. Each process may be in one of the 
following states: 
New. The process is being created. 
Running. Instructions are being executed. 
Waiting. The process is waiting for some event to occur (such as an I/0 
completion or reception of a signal). 
Ready. The process is waiting to be assigned to a processor. 
Terminated. The process has finished execution. 
These names are arbitrary, and they vary across operating systems. The states 
that they represent are found on all systems, however. Certain operating 
systems also more finely delineate process states. It is important to realize 
that only one process can be running on any processor at any instant. Many 
processes may be ready and waiting, however. The state diagram corresponding 
to these states is presented in Figure 3.2. 
3.1.3 Process Control Block 
"§_(1cb pr()cess isrepreserlt~pjnthe operatir1,g system l:Jy a process_ coptrol blo_ck _ 
(PCB)-alsocalled a taskcontroZbloclc. A PCB is shown in Figure 3.3. It contains 
mi:my pieces of iil.format1o11assodated with a specific process, including these: 

104 
Chapter 3 
• • • 
Figure 3.3 Process control block (PCB). 
Process state. The state may be new, ready runnil•g, waiting, halted, and 
so on. 
Program counter. The counter indicates the address of the next instruction 
to be executed for this process. 
CPU registers. The registers vary in number and type, depending on 
the computer architecture. They mclude accumulators, index registers, 
stack pointers, and general-purpose registers, plus any condition-code 
information. Along with the program counter, this state information must 
be saved when an mterrupt occurs, to allow the process to be continued 
correctly afterward (Figure 3.4). 
CPU-scheduling information. This information includes a process priority, 
pointers to scheduling queues, and any other scheduling parameters. 
(Chapter 5 describes process scheduling.) 
Memory-management information. This information may include such 
information as the value of the base and limit registers, the page tables, 
or the segment tables, dependmg on the memory system used by the 
operating system (Chapter 8). 
Accounting information. This mformation includes the amount of CPU 
and real time used, time limits, account numbers, job or process numbers, 
and so on. 
I/O status information. This information includes the list of I/O devices 
allocated to the process, a list of open files, and so on. 
In briet the PCB simply serves as the repository for any information that may 
vary from process to process. 
3.1.4 Threads 
The process model discussed so far has implied that a process is a program 
that performs a single thread of execution. For example, when a process is 
running a word-processor program, a single thread of instructions is being 
executed. This single thread of control allows the process to perform only one 

3.2 
process P0 
idle 
3.2 
operating system 
interrupt or system call 
• 
• 
process P 1 
executing 
idle 
Figure 3.4 Diagram showing CPU switch from process to process. 
105 
task at one time. The user cannot simultaneously type in characters and run the 
spell checker within the same process, for example. Many modern operatin.g 
systems have extended the process concept to allow a process to have multiple 
threads of execution and thus to perform more than one task at a time. On a 
system that supports threads, the PCB is expanded to include information for 
each thread. Other changes throughout the system are also needed to support 
threads. Chapter 4 explores multithreaded processes in detail. 
The objective of multiprogramming is to have some process nnming at all 
times, to maximize CPU utilization. The objective of time sharing is to switch the 
CPU among processes so frequently that users can interact with each program 
while it is run.ning. To meet these objectives, the process scheduler selects 
an available process (possibly from a set of several available processes) for 
program execution on the CPU. For a single-processor system, there will never 
be more than one running process. If there are more processes, the rest will 
have to wait until the CPU is free and can be rescheduled. 
3.2.1 Scheduling Queues 
As processes enter the system, they are put into a job queue, which consists 
of all processes in the system. The processes that are residing in main memory 
and are ready and waiting to execute are kept on a list called the ready queue. 

106 
Chapter 3 
PROCESS REPRESENTATION IN LINUX 
The process control block in the Linux operating system is represented 
by the C struch1re task_struct. This structure contains all the necessary 
information for representing a process, including the state of the process, 
scheduling and memory-management information, list of open files, and 
pointers to the process's parent and any of its children. (A process's parent is 
the process that created it; its children are any processes that it creates.) Some 
of these fields include: 
pid_t pid; I* process identifier *I 
long state; I* state of the process *I 
unsigned int time_slice I* scheduling information *I 
struct task_struct *parent; I* this process's parent *I 
struct list__head children; I* this process's children *I 
struct files_struct *files; I* list of open files *I 
struct mm_struct *mm; I* address space of this process *I 
For example, the state of a process isrepresented by the field long state 
in this structure. Within the Linux kernel, all active processes are represented 
using a doubly linked list of task_struct, and the kernel maintains a pointer 
-current -to the process currently executing on the system. This is shown 
in Figure 3.5. 
struct task_struct 
process information 
struct task_struct 
process information 
t 
current 
(currently executing proccess) 
Figure 3.5 Active processes in Linux. 
struct task_struct 
process information 
As an illustration of how the kernel might manipulate one of the fields in 
the task_struct for a specified process, let's assume the system would like 
to change the state of the process currently running to the value new_state. 
If currentis a pointer to the process currently executing, its state is changed 
with the following: 
current->state = new_state; 
This queue is generally stored as a linked list. A ready-queue header contains 
pointers to the first and final PCBs in the list. Each PCB includes a pointer field 
that points to the next PCB in the ready queue. 

3.2 
107 
queue header 
mag 
tape ~=7:C""77~""""" 
unit 0 k:\\t_82_11~~il-== 
Figure 3.6 The ready queue and various 1/0 device queues. 
The system also includes other queues. When a process is allocated the 
CPU, it executes for a while and eventually quits, is interrupted, or waits for 
the occurrence of a particular event, such as the completion of an I/0 request. 
Suppose the process makes an I/O request to a shared device, such as a disk. 
Since there are many processes in the system, the disk may be busy with the 
I/0 request of some other process. The process therefore may have to wait for 
the disk. The list of processes waiting for a particular I/0 device is called a 
device queue. Each device has its own device queue (Figure 3.6). 
A common representation of process scheduling is a queueing diagram, 
such as that in Figure 3.7. Each rectangular box represents a queue. Two types 
of queues are present: the ready queue and a set of device queues. The circles 
represent the resources that serve the queues, and the arrows indicate the flow 
of processes in the system. 
A new process is initially put in the ready queue. It waits there until it is 
selected for execution, or is dispatched. Once the process is allocated the CPU 
and is executing, one of several events could occur: 
The process could issue an I/0 request and then be placed in an I/0 queue. 
The process could create a new subprocess and wait for the subprocess's 
termination. 
The process could be removed forcibly from the CPU, as a result of an 
interrupt, and be put back in the ready queue. 

108 
Chapter 3 
Figure 3.7 Queueing-diagram representation of process scheduling. 
In the first two cases, the process eventually switches from the waiting state 
to the ready state and is then put back in the ready queue. A process continues 
this cycle until it terminates, at which time it is removed from all queues and 
has its PCB and resources deallocated. 
3.2.2 Schedulers 
A process migrates among the various scheduling queues throughout its 
lifetime. The operating system must select, for scheduling purposes, processes 
from these queues in some fashion. The selection process is carried out by the 
appropriate scheduler. 
Often, in a batch system, more processes are submitted than can be executed 
immediately. These processes are spooled to a mass-storage device (typically a 
disk), where they are kept for later execution. The long-term scheduler, or job 
scheduler, selects processes from this pool and loads them into memory for 
execution. The short-term scheduler, or CPU scheduler, selects from among 
the processes that are ready to execute and allocates the CPU to one of them. 
The primary distinction between these two schedulers lies in frequency 
of execution. The short-term scheduler must select a new process for the CPU 
frequently. A process may execute for only a few milliseconds before waiting 
for an I/0 request. Often, the short-term scheduler executes at least once every 
100 milliseconds. Because of the short time between executions, the short-term 
scheduler must be fast. If it takes 10 milliseconds to decide to execute a process 
for 100 milliseconds, then 10 I (100 + 10) = 9 percent of the CPU is being used 
(wasted) simply for scheduling the work. 
The long-term scheduler executes much less freqvently; minutes may sep-
arate the creation of one new process and the next. The long-term scheduler 
controls the degree of multiprogramming (the number of processes in mem-
ory). If the degree of multiprogramming is stable, then the average rate of 
process creation must be equal to the average departure rate of processes 
leaving the system. Thus, the long-term scheduler may need to be invoked 

3.2 
109 
only when a process leaves the system. Because of the longer interval between 
executions, the long-term scheduler can afford to take more tin<e to decide 
which process should be selected for execution. 
It is important that the long-term scheduler make a careful selection. In 
general, most processes can be described as either I/ 0 bound or CPU bound. An 
I/O-bound process is one that spends more of its time doing I/O than it spends 
doing computations. A CPU-bound process, in contrast, generates I/0 requests 
infrequently, using more of its time doing computations. It is important that the 
long-term scheduler select a good process mix of I/O-bound and CPU-bound 
processes. If all processes are I/0 bound, the ready queue will almost always 
be empty, and the short-term scheduler will have little to do. If all processes 
are CPU bound, the I/0 waiting queue will almost always be empty, devices 
will go unused, and again the system will be unbalanced. The system with the 
best performance will thus have a combination of CPU-bound and I/O-bound 
processes. 
On some systems, the long-term scheduler may be absent or minimal. 
For example, time-sharing systems such as UNIX and Microsoft Windows 
systems often have no long-term scheduler but simply put every new process in 
memory for the short-term scheduler. The stability of these systems depends 
either on a physical limitation (such as the number of available terminals) 
or on the self-adjusting nature of human users. If performance declines to 
m<acceptable levels on a multiuser system, some users will simply quit. 
Some operating systems, such as time-sharing systems, may introduce an 
additional, intermediate level of scheduling. This medium-term scheduler is 
diagrammed in Figure 3.8. The key idea behind a medium-term scheduler 
is that sometimes it can be advantageous to remove processes from mem-
ory (and from active contention for the CPU) and thus reduce the degree 
of multiprogramrning. Later, the process can be reintroduced into memory, 
and its execution can be continued where it left off. This scheme is called 
swapping. The process is swapped out, and is later swapped in, by the 
medium-term scheduler. Swapping may be necessary to improve the pro-
cess mix or because a change in memory requirements has overcommitted 
available memory, requiring memory to be freed up. Swapping is discussed in 
Chapter 8. 
swap in 
.·.····••·.· •. ··. partiaii}' exec~t~d 
•sw11pped-out processes·. 
swap out 
Figure 3.8 Addition of medium-term scheduling to the queueing diagram. 

110 
Chapter 3 
3.3 
3.2.3 Context Switch 
As mentioned in Section 1.2.1, interrupts cause the operating system to change 
a CPU from its current task and to run a kernel routine. Such operations happen 
frequently on general-purpose systems. When an interrupt occurs, the system 
needs to save the current 
of the process running on the CPU so that 
it can restore that context when its processing is done, essentially suspending 
the process and then resuming it. The context is represented in the PCB of the 
process; it includes the value of the CPU registers, the process state (see Figure 
3.2), and memory-management information. Generically, we perform a 
of the current state of the CPU, be it in kernel or user mode, and then a 
to resu.me operations. 
Switching the CPU to another process requires performing a state save 
of the current process and a state restore of a different process. This task is 
known as a 
When a context switch occurs, the kernel saves the 
context of the old process in its PCB and loads the saved context of the new 
process scheduled to run. Context-switch time is pure overhead, because the 
system does no useful work while switching. Its speed varies from machine to 
machine, depending on the memory speed, the number of registers that must 
be copied, and the existence of special instructions (such as a single instruction 
to load or store all registers). Typical speeds are a few milliseconds. 
Context-switch times are highly dependent on hardware support. For 
instance, some processors (such as the Sun UltraSPARC) provide multiple sets 
of registers. A context switch here simply requires changing the pointer to the 
current register set. Of course, if there are more active processes than there are 
register sets, the system resorts to copying register data to and from memory, 
as before. Also, the more complex the operating system, the more work must 
be done during a context switch. As we will see in Chapter 8, advanced 
memory-management techniques may require extra data to be switched with 
each context. For instance, the address space of the current process must be 
preserved as the space of the next task is prepared for use. How the address 
space is preserved, and what amount of work is needed to preserve it, depend 
on the memory-management method of the operating system. 
The processes in most systems can execute concurrently, and they may 
be created and deleted dynamically. Thus, these systems must provide a 
mechanism for process creation and termination. In this section, we explore 
the n1.echanisms involved in creating processes and illustrate process creation 
on UNIX and Windows systems. 
3.3.1 Process Creation 
A process may create several new processes, via a create-process system call, 
during the course of execution. The creating process is called a parent process, 
and the new processes are called the children of that process. Each of these 
new processes may in turn create other processes, forming a tree of processes. 
Most operating systems (including UNIX and the Windows family of 
operating systems) identify processes according to a unique process identifier 

3.3 
111 
(or pid), which is typically an integer number. Figure 3.9 illustrates a typical 
process tree for the Solaris operating system, showing the name of each process 
and its pid. In Solaris, the process at the top of the tree is the sched process, 
with pid of 0. The sched process creates several children processes-including 
pageout and fsflush. These processes are responsible for managing memory 
and file systems. The sched process also creates the ini t process, which serves 
as the root parent process for all user processes. In Figure 3.9, we see two 
children of ini t-inetd and dtlogin. inetd is responsible for networking 
services such as telnet and ftp; dtlogin is the process representing a user 
login screen. When a user logs in, dtlogin creates an X-windows session 
(Xsession), which in turns creates the sdt_shel process. Below sdLshel, a 
user's command-line shell-the C-shell or csh-is created. In this command-
line interface, the user can then invoke various child processes, such as the ls 
and cat commands. We also see a csh process with pid of 7778 representing a 
user who has logged onto the system using telnet. This user has started the 
Netscape browser (pid of 7785) and the emacs editor (pid of 8105). 
On UNIX, we can obtain a listing of processes by using the ps command. For 
example, the command ps -el will list complete information for all processes 
currently active in the system. It is easy to construct a process tree similar to 
what is shown in Figure 3.9 by recursively tracing parent processes all the way 
to the ini t process. 
In general, a process will need certain resources (CPU time, memory, files, 
I/0 devices) to accomplish its task. When a process creates a subprocess, that 
inetd 
pid=140 
dtlogin 
pid = 251 
Figure 3.9 A tree of processes on a typical Solaris system. 

112 
Chapter 3 
subprocess may be able to obtain its resources directly from the operating 
system, or it may be constrained to a subset of the resources of the parent 
process. The parent may have to partition its resources among its children, 
or it may be able to share some resources (such as ncemory or files) among 
several of its children. Restricting a child process to a subset of the parent's 
resources prevents any process from overloading the system by creating too 
many subprocesses. 
In addition to the various physical and logical resources that a process 
obtains when it is created, initialization data (input) may be passed along by 
the parent process to the child process. For example, consider a process whose 
function is to display the contents of a file-say, img.jpg-on the screen of a 
terminal. When it is created, it will get, as an input from its parent process, 
the name of the file img.jpg, and it will use that file name, open the file, and 
write the contents out. It may also get the name of the output device. Some 
operating systems pass resources to child processes. On such a system, the 
new process may get two open files, img.jpg and the terminal device, and may 
simply transfer the datum between the two. 
When a process creates a new process, two possibilities exist in terms of 
execution: 
The parent continues to execute concurrently with its children. 
The parent waits until some or all of its children have terminated. 
There are also two possibilities in terms of the address space of the new process: 
The child process is a duplicate of the parent process (it has the same 
program and data as the parent). 
The child process has a new program loaded into it. 
To illustrate these differences, let's first consider the UNIX operating system. 
In UNIX, as we've seen, each process is identified by its process identifier, 
which is a tmique integer. A new process is created by the fork() system 
call. The new process consists of a copy of the address space of the original 
process. This mechanism allows the parent process to communicate easily with 
its child process. Both processes (the parent and the child) continue execution 
at the instruction after the fork () , with one difference: the return code for 
the fork() is zero for the new (child) process, whereas the (nonzero) process 
identifier of the child is returned to the parent. 
Typically, the exec() system call is used after a fork() system call by 
one of the two processes to replace the process's memory space with a new 
program. The exec() system call loads a binary file into memory (destroying 
the memory image of the program containing the exec() system call) and 
starts its execution. In this manner, the two processes are able to communicate 
and then go their separate ways. The parent can then create more children; or, 
if it has nothing else to do while the child runs, it can issue await() system 
call to move itself off the ready queue until the termination of the child. 
The C program shown in Figure 3.10 illustrates the UNIX system calls 
previously described. We now have two different processes running copies of 
the same program. The only difference is that the value of pid (the process 

3.3 
#include <sysltypes.h> 
#include <stdio.h> 
#include <unistd.h> 
int main() 
{ 
pid_t pid; 
} 
I* fork a child process *I 
pid =fork(); 
if (pid < 0) { I* error occurred *I 
fprintf(stderr, "Fork Failed"); 
return 1; 
} 
else if (pid == 0) { I* child process *I 
execlp("lbinlls","ls",NULL); 
} 
else { I* parent process *I 
} 
I* parent will wait for the child to complete *I 
wait (NULL) ; 
printf("Child Complete"); 
return 0; 
Figure 3.10 Creating a separate process using the UNIX fork() system call. 
113 
identifier) for the child process is zero, while that for the parent is an integer 
value greater than zero (in fact, it is the actual pid of the child process). The 
child process inherits privileges and scheduling attributes from the parent, 
as well certain resources, such as open files. The child process then overlays 
its address space with the UNIX command lbin/ls (used to get a directory 
listing) using the execlp() system call (execlp() is a version of the exec() 
system call). The parent waits for the child process to complete with the wait() 
system call. When the child process completes (by either implicitly or explicitly 
invoking exit ()) the parent process resumes from the call to wait (),where it 
completes using the exit() system call. This is also illustrated in Figure 3.11. 
parent 
wait 
resumes 
child 
~--------+( 
exit() 
Figure 3.11 
Process creation using fork() system call. 

114 
Chapter 3 
#include <stdio.h> 
#include <windows.h> 
int main(VOID) 
{ 
STARTUPINFO si; 
PROCESS_INFORMATION pi; 
} 
II allocate memory 
ZeroMemory(&si, sizeof(si)); 
si.cb = sizeof(si); 
ZeroMemory(&pi, sizeof(pi)); 
II create child process 
if (!CreateProcess(NULL, II use command line 
"C:\\WINDOWS\\system32\\mspaint.exe", II command line 
NULL, II don't inherit process handle 
{ 
} 
NULL, II don't inherit thread handle 
FALSE, II disable handle inheritance 
0, II no creation flags 
NULL, II use parent's environment block 
NULL, II use parent's existing directory 
&si, 
&pi)) 
fprintf(stderr, "Create Process Failed"); 
return -1; 
II parent will wait for the child to complete 
WaitForSingleObject(pi.hProcess, INFINITE); 
printf("Child Complete"); 
II close handles 
CloseHandle(pi.hProcess); 
CloseHandle(pi.hThread); 
Figure 3.12 Creating a separate process using the Win32 API. 
As an alternative examplef we next consider process creation in Windows. 
Processes are created in the Win32 API using the CreateProcess () functionf 
which is similar to fork () in that a parent creates a new child process. Howeverf 
whereas fork() has the child process inheriting the address space of its parent 
CreateProcess () requires loading a specified program into the address space 
of the child process at process creation. Furthermoref whereas fork() is passed 
no parametersf CreateProcess () expects no fewer than ten parameters. 
The C program shown in Figure 3.12 illustrates the CreateProcess () 
functionf which creates a child process that loads the application mspaint. ex e. 
We opt for many of the default values of the ten parameters passed to 
CreateProcess (). Readers interested in pursuing the details of process 

3.3 
115 
creation and management in the Win32 API are encouraged to consult the 
bibliographical notes at the end of this chapter. 
Two parameters passed to CreateProcess () are instances of the START-
UPINFO and PROCESS_INFORMATION structures. STARTUPINFO specifies many 
properties of the new process, such as window size and appearance and han-
dles to standard input and output files. The PROCESS_INFORMATION structure 
contains a handle and the identifiers to the newly created process and its thread. 
We invoke the ZeroMemory () function to allocate memory for each of these 
structures before proceeding with CreateProcess (). 
The first two parameters passed to CreateProcess () are the application 
name and command-line parameters. If the application name is NULL (as 
it is in this case), the command-line parameter specifies the application to 
load. In this instance, we are loading the Microsoft Windows mspaint.exe 
application. Beyond these two initial parameters, we use the default parameters 
for inheriting process and thread handles as well as specifying no creation flags. 
We also use the parent's existing environment block and starting directory. 
Last, we provide two pointers to the STARTUPINFO and PROCESS.lNFORMATION 
structures created at the beginning of the program. In Figure 3.10, the parent 
process waits for the child to complete by invoking the wait () system 
calL The equivalent of this in Win32 is Wai tForSingleObj ect (), which is 
passed a handle of the child process-pi. hProcess-and waits for this 
process to complete. Once the child process exits, control returns from the 
Wai tForSingleObj ect () function in the parent process. 
3.3.2 Process Termination 
A process terminates when it finishes executing its final statement and asks the 
operating system to delete it by using the exit () system calL At that point, the 
process may return a status value (typically an integer) to its parent process 
(via the wait() system call). All the resources of the process-including 
physical and virtual memory, open files, and I/0 buffers-are deallocated 
by the operating system. 
Termination can occur in other circumstances as welL A process can cause 
the termination of another process via an appropriate system call (for example, 
TerminateProcess () in Win32). Usually, such a system call can be invoked 
only by the parent of the process that is to be terminated. Otherwise, users 
could arbitrarily kill each other's jobs. Note that a parent needs to know the 
identities of its children. Thus, when one process creates a new process, the 
identity of the newly created process is passed to the parent. 
A parent may terminate the execution of one of its children for a variety of 
reasons, such as these: 
The child has exceeded its usage of some of the resources that it has been 
allocated. (To determine whether this has occurred, the parent m.ust have 
a mechanism to inspect the state of its children.) 
The task assigned to the child is no longer required. 
The parent is exiting, and the operating system does not allow a child to 
continue if its parent terminates. 

116 
Chapter 3 
3.4 
Some systencs, including VMS, do not allow a child to exist if its parent 
has terminated. In such systems, if a process terminates (either normally or 
abnormally), then all its children must also be terminated. This phenomenon, 
referred to as cascading termination, is normally initiated by the operating 
system. 
To illustrate process execution and termination, consider that, in UNIX, we 
can terminate a process by using the exit() system call; its parent process 
may wait for the termination of a child process by using the wait() system 
call. The wait() system call returns the process identifier of a terminated child 
so that the parent can tell which of its children has terminated. If the parent 
terminates, however, all its children have assigned as their new parent the 
ini t process. Thus, the children still have a parent to collect their status and 
execution statistics. 
Processes executing concurrently in the operating system may be either 
independent processes or cooperating processes. A process is independent 
if it cannot affect or be affected by the other processes executing in the system. 
Any process that does not share data with any other process is independent. A 
process is cooperating if it can affect or be affected by the other processes 
executing in the system. Clearly, any process that shares data with other 
processes is a cooperating process. 
There are several reasons for providing an environment that allows process 
cooperation: 
Information sharing. Since several users may be interested in the same 
piece of information (for instance, a shared file), we must provide an 
environment to allow concurrent access to such information. 
Computation speedup. If we want a particular task to run faster, we must 
break it into subtasks, each of which will be executing in parallel with the 
others. Notice that such a speedup can be achieved only if the computer 
has multiple processing elements (such as CPUs or I/O channels). 
Modularity. We may want to construct the system in a modular fashion, 
dividing the system functions into separate processes or threads, as we 
discussed in Chapter 2. 
Convenience. Even an individual user may work on many tasks at the 
same time. For instance, a user may be editing, printing, and compiling in 
parallel. 
Cooperating processes require an interprocess communication (IPC) mech-
anism that will allow them to exchange data and information. There are two 
fundamental models of interprocess communication: (1) shared memory and 
(2) message passing. In the shared-memory model, a region of memory that 
is shared by cooperating processes is established. Processes can then exchange 
information by reading and writing data to the shared region. In the message-
passing model, communication takes place by means of messages exchanged 

3.4 
117 
process A 
process A 
2 
2 
kernel 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 3.13 Communications models. (a) Message passing. (b) Shared memory. 
between the cooperating processes. The two communications models are 
conh·asted in Figure 3.13. 
Both of the models just discussed are common in operating systems, and 
many systems implement both. Message passing is useful for exchanging 
smaller ammmts of data, because no conflicts need be avoided. Message 
passing is also easier to implement than is shared memory for intercomputer 
communication. Shared memory allows maximum speed and convenience of 
communication. Shared memory is faster than message passing, as message-
passing system.s are typically implemented using system calls and thus require 
the more time-consuming task of kernel irttervention. In contrast, in shared-
memory systems, system calls are required only to establish shared-memory 
regions. Once shared memory is established, all accesses are treated as routine 
memory accesses, and no assistance from the kernel is required. In the 
ren1.ainder of this section, we explore each of these IPC models in more detail. 
3.4.1 Shared-Memory Systems 
Interprocess communication using shared memory requires communicating 
processes to establish a region of shared memory. Typically, a shared-memory 
region resides in the address space of the process creating the shared-
memory segment. Other processes that wish to communicate using this shared-
memory segment must attach it to their address space. Recall that, normally, the 
operating system tries to prevent one process from accessing another process's 
memory. Shared memory requires that two or more processes agree to remove 
this restriction. They can then excbange information by reading and writing 
data in the shared areas. The form of the data and the location are determined by 
these processes and are not under the operating system's control. The processes 
are also responsible for ensuring that they are not writing to the same location 
simultaneously. 

118 
Chapter 3 
To illustrate the concept of cooperating processes, let's consider the 
producer-consumer problem, which is a common paradigm for cooperating 
processes. A producer process produces information that is consumed by a 
consumer process. For example, a compiler may produce assembly code, 
which is consumed by an assembler. The assembler, in turn, ncay produce 
object modules, which are consumed by the loader. The producer-consumer 
problem also provides a useful metaphor for the client-server paradigm. We 
generally think of a server as a producer and a client as a consumer. For 
example, a Web server produces (that is, provides) HTML files and images, 
which are consumed (that is, read) by the client Web browser requesting the 
resource. 
One solution to the producer-consumer problem uses shared memory. To 
allow producer and consumer processes to run concurrently, we must have 
available a buffer of items that can be filled by the producer and emptied by 
the consumer. This buffer will reside in a region of memory that is shared 
by the producer and consumer processes. A producer can produce one item 
while the consumer is consuming another item. The producer and consumer 
must be synchronized, so that the consumer does not try to consume an item 
that has not yet been produced. 
Two types of buffers can be used. The 
places no practical 
limit on the size of the buffer. The consumer may have to wait for new items, 
but the producer can always produce new items. The 
assumes 
a fixed buffer size. In this case, the consumer must wait if the buffer is empty, 
and the producer must wait if the buffer is full. 
Let's look more closely at how the bounded buffer can be used to enable 
processes to share memory. The following variables reside in a region of 
memory shared by the producer and consumer processes: 
#define BUFFER_SIZE 10 
typedef struct 
}item; 
item buffer[BUFFER_SIZE]; 
int in = 0; 
int out = 0; 
The shared buffer is implemented as a circular array with two logical 
pointers: in and out. The variable in points to the next free position in the 
buffer; out points to the first full position in the buffer. The buffer is empty 
when in== out; the buffer is full when ((in+ 1)% BUFFER_SIZE) == out. 
The code for the producer and consumer processes is shown in Figures 3.14 
and 3.15, respectively. The producer process has a local variable nextProduced 
in which the new item to be produced is stored. The consumer process has a 
local variable next Consumed in which the item to be consumed is stored. 
This scheme allows at most BUFFER_SIZE - 1 items in the buffer at the same 
time. We leave it as an exercise for you to provide a solution where BUFFER_SIZE 
items can be in the buffer at the same time. In Section 3.5.1, we illustrate the 
POSIX API for shared memory. 

3.4 
item nextProduced; 
while (true) { 
} 
I* produce an item in nextProduced *I 
while ( ((in + 1) % BUFFER_SIZE) == out) 
; I* do nothing *I 
buffer[in] = nextProduced; 
in = (in + 1) % BUFFER_SIZE; 
Figure 3.'14 The producer process. 
119 
One issue this illustration does not address concerns the situation in which 
both the producer process and the consumer process attempt to access the 
shared buffer concurrently. In Chapter 6, we discuss how synchronization 
among cooperating processes can be implemented effectively in a shared-
memory environment. 
3.4.2 Message-Passing Systems 
lrt Section 3.4.1, we showed how cooperating processes can communicate in a 
shared-memory environment. The scheme requires that these processes share a 
region of memory and that the code for accessing and manipulating the shared 
memory be written explicitly by the application programmer. Another way to 
achieve the same effect is for the operating system to provide the means for 
cooperating processes to comm"Lmicate with each other via a message-passing 
facility. 
Message passing provides a mechanism to allow processes to communicate 
and to synchronize their actions without sharing the same address space and 
is particularly useful in a distributed environment, where the communicating 
processes may reside on different computers connected by a network. For 
example, a chat program used on the World Wide Web could be designed so 
that chat participants communicate with one another by exchanging messages. 
A message-passing facility provides at least two operations: send(message) 
and recei ve(message). Messages sent by a process can be of either fixed 
or variable size. If only fixed-sized messages can be sent, the system-level 
implementation is straightforward. This restriction, however, makes the task 
item nextConsumed; 
while (true) { 
} 
while (in == out) 
; II do nothing 
nextConsumed = buffer[out]; 
out = (out + 1) % BUFFER_SIZE; 
I* consume the item in nextConsumed *I 
Figure 3.15 The consumer process. 

120 
Chapter 3 
of programming more difficult. Conversely, variable-sized messages require 
a 1nore complex system-level implementation, but the programming task 
becomes simpler. This is a COITlmon kind of tradeoff seen throughout operating-
system design. 
If processes P and Q want to communicate, they must send messages to and 
receive messages from each other; a communication link must exist between 
them. This link can be implemented in a variety of ways. We are concerned here 
not with the link's physical implementation (such as shared memory, hardware 
bus, or network, which are covered in Chapter 16) but rather with its logical 
implementation. Here are several methods for logically implementing a link 
and the send 0 I receive() operations: 
Direct or indirect communication 
Synchronous or asynchronous communication 
Automatic or explicit buffering 
We look at issues related to each of these features next. 
3.4.2.1 Naming 
Processes that want to communicate must have a way to refer to each other. 
They can use either direct or indirect communication. 
Under direct communication, each process that wants to comm"Lmicate 
must explicitly name the recipient or sender of the communication. In this 
scheme, the send() and receive() primitives are defined as: 
send(P, message) -Send a message to process P. 
receive (Q, message)-Receive a message from process Q. 
A communication link in this scheme has the following properties: 
A link is established automatically between every pair of processes that 
want to communicate. The processes need to know only each other's 
identity to communicate. 
A link is associated with exactly two processes. 
Between each pair of processes, there exists exactly one link. 
This scheme exhibits symmetry in addressing; that is, both the sender 
process and the receiver process must name the other to communicate. A 
variant of this scheme employs asymmetry in addressing. Here, only the sender 
names the recipient; the recipient is not required to name the sender. In this 
scheme, the send() and receive() primitives are defined as follows: 
send(P, message) -Send a message to process P. 
receive (id, message) -Receive a message from any process; the vari-
able id is set to the name of the process with which communication has 
taken place. 
The disadvantage in both of these schemes (symmetric and asymmetric) 
is the limited modularity of the resulting process definitions. Changing the 
identifier of a process may necessitate examining all other process definitions. 
All references to the old identifier must be found, so that they can be modified 

3.4 
121 
to the new identifier. In general, any such hard-coding techniques, where 
identifiers must be explicitly stated, are less desirable than techniques involving 
indirection, as described next. 
With indirect communication, the messages are sent to and received from 
mailboxes, or ports. A mailbox can be viewed abstractly as an object into which 
messages can be placed by processes and from which messages can be removed. 
Each mailbox has a w1.ique identification. For example, POSIX message queues 
use an integer value to identify a mailbox. In this scheme, a process can 
communicate with some other process via a number of different mailboxes. 
Two processes can communicate only if the processes have a shared mailbox, 
however. The send() and receive 0 primitives are defined as follows: 
send (A, message) -Send a message to mailbox A. 
receive (A, message)-Receive a message from mailbox A. 
In this scheme, a communication link has the following properties: 
A link is established between a pair of processes only if both members of 
the pair have a shared mailbox. 
A link may be associated with more than two processes. 
Between each pair of communicating processes, there may be a number of 
different links, with each link corresponding to one mailbox. 
Now suppose that processes P1, P2, and P3 all share mailbox A. Process 
P1 sends a message to A, while both P2 and P3 execute a receive 0 from A. 
Which process will receive the message sent by P1? The answer depends on 
which of the following methods we choose: 
Allow a link to be associated with two processes at most. 
Allow at most one process at a time to execute a receive 0 operation. 
Allow the system to select arbitrarily which process will receive the 
message (that is, either P2 or P3, but not both, will receive the message). 
The system also may define an algorithm for selecting which process 
will receive the message (that is, round robin, where processes take turns 
receiving messages). The system may identify the receiver to the sender. 
A mailbox may be owned eith~r by a process or by the operating system. 
If the mailbox is owned by a process (that is, the mailbox is part of the address 
space of the process), then we distinguish between the owner (which can 
only receive messages through this mailbox) and the user (which can only 
send messages to the mailbox). Since each mailbox has a unique owner, there 
can be no confusion about which process should receive a message sent to 
this mailbox. When a process that owns a mailbox terminates, the mailbox 
disappears. Any process that subsequently sends a message to this mailbox 
must be notified that the mailbox no longer exists. 
In contrast, a mailbox that is owned by the operating system has an 
existence of its own. It is independent and is not attached to any particular 
process. The operating system then must provide a mechanism that allows a 
process to do the following: 

122 
Chapter 3 
Create a new mailbox. 
Send and receive messages through the mailbox. 
Delete a mailbox. 
The process that creates a new mailbox is that mailbox's owner by default. 
Initially, the owner is the only process that can receive messages through this 
n:tailbox. However, the ownership and receiving privilege may be passed to 
other processes through appropriate system calls. Of course, this provision 
could result in multiple receivers for each mailbox. 
3.4.2.2 
Synchronization 
Communication between processes takes place through calls to send() and 
receive () primitives. There are different design options for implementing 
each primitive. Message passing may be either blocking or nonblocking-
also known as synchronous and asynchronous. 
Blocking send. The sending process is blocked until the message is 
received by the receiving process or by the mailbox. 
Nonblocking send. The sending process sends the message and resumes 
operation. 
Blocking receive. The receiver blocks until a message is available. 
Nonblocking receive. The receiver retrieves either a valid message or a 
null. 
Different combinations of send() and receive() are possible. When both 
send() and receive() are blocking, we have a rendezvous between the 
sender and the receiver. The solution to the producer-consumer problem 
becomes trivial when we use blocking send() and receive() statements. 
The producer merely invokes the blocking send() call and waits until the 
message is delivered to either the receiver or the mailbox. Likewise, when the 
consumer invokes receive(), it blocks until a message is available. 
Note that the concepts of synchronous and asynchronous occur frequently 
in operating-system I/0 algorithms, as you will see throughout this text. 
3.4.2.3 
Buffering 
Whether communication is direct or indirect, messages exchanged by commu-
nicating processes reside in a temporary queue. Basically, such queues can be 
implemented in three ways: 
Zero capacity. The queue has a maximum length of zero; thus, the link 
cannot have any messages waiting in it. In this case, the sender must block 
until the recipient receives the message. 
Bounded capacity. The que~ue has finite length n; thus, at most n messages 
can reside in it. If the queue is not full when a new message is sent, the 
message is placed in the queue (either the message is copied or a pointer 
to the message is kept), and the sender can continue execution without 

3.5 
3.5 
123 
waiting. The link's capacity is finite, however. If the link is full, the sender 
must block until space is available in the queLie. 
Unbounded capacity. The queue's length is potentially infinite; thus, any 
number of messages can wait in it. The sender never blocks. 
The zero-capacity case is sometimes referred to as a message system with no 
buffering; the other cases are referred to as systems with automatic buffering. 
In this section, we explore three different IPC systems. We first cover the 
POSIX API for shared memory and then discuss message passing in the Mach 
operating system. We conclude with Windows XP, which interestingly uses 
shared memory as a mechanism for providing certain types of message passing. 
3.5.1 An Example: POSIX Shared Memory 
Several IPC mechanisms are available for POSIX systems, including shared 
memory and message passing. Here, we explore the POSIX API for shared 
memory. 
A process must first create a shared memory segment using the shmget () 
system call (shmget () is derived from SHared Memory GET). The following 
example illustrates the use of shmget (): 
segment_id = shmget (IPCPRIVATE, size, S_lRUSR I S_lWUSR) ; 
This first parameter specifies the key (or identifier) of the shared-memory 
segment. If this is set to IPCPRIVATE, a new shared-memory segment is created. 
The second parameter specifies the size (in bytes) of the shared-memory 
segment. Finally, the third parameter identifies the mode, which indicates 
how the shared-memory segment is to be used-that is, for reading, writing, 
or both. By setting the mode to S_lRUSR 
1 S_lWUSR, we are indicating that the 
owner may read or write to the shared-memory segment. A successful call to 
shmget () returns an integer identifier for the shared-memory segment. Other 
processes that want to use this region of shared memory must specify this 
identifier. 
Processes that wish to access a shared-memory segment must attach it to 
their address space using the shmat () (SHared Memory ATtach) system call. 
The call to shmat () expects three parameters as well. The first is the integer 
identifier of the shared-memory segment being attached, and the second is 
a pointer location in memory indicating where the shared ncemory will be 
attached. If we pass a value of NULL, the operating system selects the location 
on the user's behalf. The third parameter identifies a flag that allows the shared-
memory region to be attached in read-only or read-write mode; by passing a 
parameter of 0, we allow both reads and writes to the shared region. We attach 
a region of shared memory using shmat () as follows: 
shared_memory =(char*) shmat(id, NULL, 0); 
If successful, shmat () returns a pointer to the beginning location in memory 
where the shared-memory region has been attached. 

4.1 
CHAPTER 
The process model introduced in Chapter 3 assumed that a process was an 
executing program with a single thread of control. Most modern operating 
systems now provide features enabling a process to contain multiple threads of 
control. This chapter introduces many concepts associated with multithreaded 
computer systems, including a discussion of the APis for the Pthreads, Win32, 
and Java thread libraries. We look at many issues related to multithreaded 
programming and its effect on the design of operating systems. Finally, we 
explore how the Windows XP and Linux operating systems support threads at 
the kernel level. 
To introduce the notion of a thread- a fundamental unit of CPU utilization 
that forms the basis of multithreaded computer systems. 
To discuss the APis for the Pthreads, Win32, and Java thread libraries. 
To examine issues related to multithreaded programming. 
A thread is a basic unit of CPU utilization; it comprises a thread ID, a program 
counter, a register set, and a stack. It shares with other threads belonging 
to the same process its code section, data section, and other operating-system 
resources, such as open files and signals. A traditional (or heavrvveighl:) process 
has a single thread of control. If a process has multiple threads of control, it 
can perform more than one task at a time. Figure 4.1 illustrates the difference 
between a traditional 
process and a 
process. 
4.1.1 
Motivation 
Many software packages that run on modern desktop PCs are multithreaded. 
An application typically is implemented as a separate process with several 
threads of control. A Web browser might have one thread display images or 
153 

154 
Chapter 4 
thread--+ 
single-threaded process 
multithreaded process 
Figure 4.1 
Single-threaded and multithreaded processes. 
text while another thread retrieves data from the network, for example. A 
word processor may have a thread for displaying graphics, another thread 
for responding to keystrokes from the user, and a third thread for performing 
spelling and grammar checking in the background. 
In certain situations, a single application may be required to perform 
several similar tasks. For example, a Web server accepts client requests for 
Web pages, images, sound, and so forth. A busy Web server may have several 
(perhaps thousands of) clients concurrently accessing it. If the Web server ran 
as a traditional single-tlu·eaded process, it would be able to service only one 
client at a time, artd a client might have to wait a very long time for its request 
to be serviced. 
One solution is to have the server run as a single process that accepts 
requests. When the server receives a request, it creates a separate process 
to service that request. In fact, this process-creation method was in common 
use before threads became popular. Process creation is time consuming and 
resource intensive, however. If the new process will perform the same tasks as 
the existing process, why incur all that overhead? It is generally more efficient 
to use one process that contains multiple threads. If the Web-server process 
is multithreaded, the server will create a separate thread that listens for client 
requests. When a request is made, rather than creating another process, the 
server will create a new thread to service the request and resume listening for 
additional requests. This is illustrated in Figure 4.2. 
Threads also play a vital role in remote procedure call (RPC) systems. Recall 
from Chapter 3 that RPCs allow interprocess communication by providing a 
communication mechanism similar to ordinary function or procedure calls. 
Typically, RPC servers are multithreaded. When a server receives a message, it 
services the message using a separate thread. This allows the server to service 
several concurrent requests. 
Finally, most operating system kernels are now multithreaded; several 
threads operate in the kernel, and each thread performs a specific task, such 

client 
(1) request 
4.1 
(2) create new 
thread to service 
the request 
1-------•1 thread 
'------.--r---10 
server 
(3) resume listening 
for additional 
client requests 
Figure 4.2 Multithreaded server architecture. 
155 
as managing devices or interrupt handling. For examplef Solaris creates a set 
of threads in the kernel specifically for interrupt handling; Linux uses a kernel 
thread for managing the amount of free memory in the system. 
4.1.2 Benefits 
The benefits of multithreaded programming can be broken down into four 
major categories: 
Responsiveness. Multithreading an interactive application may allow a 
program to continue running even if part of it is blocked or is performing 
a lengthy operation, thereby increasing responsiveness to the user. For 
instancef a multithreaded Web browser could allow user interaction in 
one thread while an image was being loaded in another thread. 
Resource sharing. Processes may only share resources through tech-
niques such as shared memory or message passing. Such techniques must 
be explicitly arranged by the programmer. However, threads share the 
memory and the resources of the process to which they belong by default. 
The benefit of sharing code and data is that it allows an application to 
have several different threads of activity within the same address space. 
3. Economy. Allocating memory and resources for process creation is costly. 
Because threads share the resources of the process to which they belong, 
it is more economical to create and context-switch threads. Empirically 
gauging the difference in overhead can be difficult, but in general it is 
much more time consuming to create and manage processes than threads. 
In Solarisf for example, creating a process is about thirty times slower than 
is creating a thread, and context switching is about five times slower. 
Scalability. The benefits of multithreading can be greatly increased in a 
multiprocessor architecture, where threads may be running in parallel 
on different processors. A single-threaded process can only run on one 
processor, regardless how many are available. Multithreading on a multi-
CPU machine increases parallelism. We explore this issue further in the 
following section. 

156 
Chapter 4 
time 
Figure 4.3 Concurrent execution on a single-core system. 
4.1.3 Multicore Programming 
A recent trend in system design has been to place multiple computing cores on 
a single chip, where each core appears as a separate processor to the operating 
system (Section 1.3.2). Multithreaded programming provides a mechanism 
for more efficient use of multiple cores and improved concurrency. Consider 
an application with four threads. On a system with a single computing core, 
concurrency merely means that the execution of the threads will be interleaved 
over time (Figure 4.3), as the processing core is capable of executing only one 
thread at a time. On a system with multiple cores, however, concurrency means 
that the threads can run in parallel, as the system can assign a separate thread 
to each core (Figure 4.4). 
The trend towards multicore systems has placed pressure on system 
designers as well as application programmers to make better use of the multiple 
computing cores. Designers of operating systems must write scheduling 
algorithms that use multiple processing cores to allow the parallel execution 
shown in Figure 4.4. For application programmers, the challenge is to modify 
existing programs as well as design new programs that are multithreaded to 
take advantage of multicore systems. In general, five areas present challenges 
in programming for multicore systems: 
Dividing activities. This involves examining applications to find areas 
that can be divided into separate, concurrent tasks and thus can run in 
parallel on individual cores. 
Balance. While identifying tasks that can run in parallel, programmers 
must also ensure that the tasks perform equal work of equal value. In 
some instances, a certain task may not contribute as much value to the 
overall process as other tasks; using a separate execution core to run that 
task may not be worth the cost. 
Data splitting. Just as applications are divided into separate tasks, the 
data accessed and manipulated by the tasks must be divided to run on 
separate cores. 
core 1 l<T1 I T3 
T1 
T3 I 
Ti 
core 2 [i] T4 
T2 
T4 I 
Tz 
time 
Figure 4.4 Parallel execution on a multicore system. 

4.2 
4.2 
157 
Data dependency. The data accessed by the tasks must be examined 
for dependencies between two or more tasks. In instances where one 
task depends on data from another, programmers must ensure that 
the execution of the tasks is synchronized to accommodate the data 
dependency. We examine such strategies in Chapter 6. 
Testing and debugging. When a program is running in parallel on 
multiple cores, there are many different execution paths. Testing and 
debugging such concurrent programs is inherently more difficult than 
testing and debugging single-threaded applications. 
Because of these challenges, many software developers argue that the advent of 
multicore systems will require an entirely new approach to designing software 
systems in the future. 
Our discussion so far has treated threads in a generic sense. However, support 
for threads may be provided either at the user level, for 
or by the 
kernel, for 
threads. User threads are supported above the kernel and 
are managed without kernel support, whereas kernel threads are supported 
and managed directly by the operating system. Virtually all contemporary 
operating systems-including Wiridows XP, Linux, Mac OS X, Solaris, and 
Tru64 UNIX (formerly Digital UNIX)-support kernel threads. 
Ultimately, a relationship must exist between user threads and kernel 
threads. In this section, we look at three common ways of establishing such a 
relationship. 
4.2.1 
Many-to-One Model 
The many-to-one model (Figure 4.5) maps many user-level threads to one 
kernel thread. Thread management is done by the thread library in user 
Figure 4.5 Many-to-one model. 

158 
Chapter 4 
-
user thread 
Figure 4.6 One-to-one model. 
space, so it is efficient; but the entire process will block if a thread makes a 
blocking system call. Also, because only one thread can access the kernel at a 
time, multiple threads are unable to nm in parallel on multiprocessors. 
-a thread library available for Solaris-uses this modet as does GNU 
4.2.2 One-to-One Model 
The one-to-one model (Figure 4.6) maps each user thread to a kernel thread. It 
provides more concurrency than the many-to-one model by allowing another 
thread to run when a thread makes a blocking system call; it also allows 
multiple threads to run in parallel on multiprocessors. The only drawback to 
this model is that creating a user thread requires creating the corresponding 
kernel thread. Because the overhead of creating kernel threads can burden the 
performance of an application, most implementations of this model restrict the 
number of threads supported by the system. Linux, along with the family of 
Windows operating systems, implement the one-to-one model. 
4.2.3 Many-to-Many Model 
The many-to-many model (Figure 4.7) multiplexes many user-level threads to 
a smaller or equal number of kernel threads. The number of kernel threads 
may be specific to either a particular application or a particular machine (an 
application may be allocated more kernel threads on a multiprocessor than 
on a uniprocessor). Whereas the many-to-one model allows the developer to 
user thread 
k 
+--- kernel thread 
Figure 4.7 Many-to-many model. 

4.3 
4.3 
159 
2 
::., 
( 
I 
~ 
( 
( 
/ 
' 
' 
/ 
( 
') 
......._ user thread 
( 
( 
( 
0 -kernel thread 
Figure 4.8 Two-level model. 
create as many user threads as she wishes, true concurrency is not gained 
because the kernel can schedule only one thread at a time. The one-to-one 
model allows for greater concurrency, but the developer has to be careful not 
to create too many threads within an application (and in some instances may 
be limited in the number of threads she can create). The many-to-many model 
suffers from neither of these shortcomings: developers can create as many user 
threads as necessary, and the corresponding kernel threads can run in parallel 
on a multiprocessor. Also, when a thread performs a blocking system call, the 
kernel can schedule another thread for execution. 
One popular variation on the many-to-many model still multiplexes many 
user-level threads to a smaller or equal number of kernel threads but also allows 
a user-level thread to be bound to a kernel thread. This variation, sometimes 
referred to as the two-level model (Figure 4.8), is supported by operating systems 
such as IRlX, HP-UX, and Tru64 UNIX. The Solaris operating system supported 
the two-level model in versions older than Solaris 9. However, beginning with 
Solaris 9, this system uses the one-to-one model. 
A 
provides the programmer with an API for creating and 
managing threads. There are two primary ways of implementii<g a thread 
library. The first approach is to provide a library entirely in user space with no 
kernel support. All code and data structures for the library exist ii< user space. 
This means that invoking a function in the library results in a local function 
call in user space and not a system call. 
The second approach is to implement a kernel-level library supported 
directly by the operating system. In this case, code and data structures for 
the library exist in kernel space. Invoking a function in the API for the library 
typically results in a system call to the kernel. 
Three main thread libraries are in use today: (1) POSIX Pthreads, (2) Win32, 
and (3) Java. Pthreads, the threads extension of the POSIX standard, may be 
provided as either a user- or kernel-level library. The Win32 thread library 
is a kernel-level library available on Windows systems. The Java thread API 
allows threads to be created and managed directly in Java programs. However, 
because in most instances the JVM is running on top of a host operating system, 

160 
Chapter 4 
the Java thread API is generally implemented using a thread library available 
on the host system. This means that on Windows systems, Java threads are 
typically implemented using the Win32 API; UNIX and Linux systems often use 
Pthreads. 
In the remainder of this section, we describe basic thread creation using 
these three thread libraries. As an illustrative example, we design a multi-
threaded program that performs the summation of a non-negative integer in a 
separate thread using the well-known summation function: 
N 
sum= I~> 
i=O 
For example, if N were 5, this function would represent the summation of 
integers from 0 to 5, which is 15. Each of the three programs will be n.m with 
the upper bounds of the summation entered on the command line; thus, if the 
user enters 8, the summation of the integer values from 0 to 8 will be output. 
4.3.1 Pthreads 
refers to the POSIX standard (IEEE 1003.lc) defining an API for thread 
creation and synchronization. This is a specification for thread behavim~ not an 
implementation. Operating system designers may implement the specification in 
any way they wish. Numerous systems implement the Pthreads specification, 
including Solaris, Linux, Mac OS X, and Tru64 UNIX. Shareware implementations 
are available in the public domain for the various Windows operating systems 
as well. 
The C program shown in Figure 4.9 demonstrates the basic Pthreads API for 
constructing a multithreaded program that calculates the summation of a non-
negative integer in a separate thread. In a Pthreads program, separate threads 
begin execution in a specified function. In Figure 4.9, this is the runner() 
function. When this program begins, a single thread of control begins in 
main (). After some initialization, main () creates a second thread that begins 
control in the runner () function. Both threads share the global data sum. 
Let's look more closely at this program. All Pthreads programs must 
include the pthread. h header file. The statement pthread_t tid declares 
the identifier for the thread we will create. Each thread has a set of attributes, 
including stack size and scheduling information. The pthread_attr_t attr 
declaration represents the attributes for the thread. We set the attributes in the 
function call pthread_attr _ini t (&attr). Because we did not explicitly set 
any attributes, we use the default attributes provided. (In Chapter 5, we discuss 
some of the scheduling attributes provided by the Pthreads API.) A separate 
thread is created with the pthread_create () function call. In addition to 
passirtg the thread identifier and the attributes for the thread, we also pass the 
name of the function where the new thread will begin execution-in this case, 
the runner () function. Last, we pass the integer parameter that was provided 
on the command line, argv [1]. 
At this point, the program has two threads: the initial (or parent) thread 
in main() and the summation (or child) thread performing the summation 

4.3 
#include <pthread.h> 
#include <stdio.h> 
int sum; I* this data is shared by the thread(s) *I 
void *runner(void *param); I* the thread *I 
int main(int argc, char *argv[]) 
{ 
} 
pthread_t tid; I* the thread identifier *I 
pthread_attr_t attr; I* set of thread attributes *I 
if (argc != 2) { 
} 
fprintf(stderr,"usage: a.out <integer value>\n"); 
return -1; 
if (atoi(argv[1]) < 0) { 
} 
fprintf(stderr,"%d must be>= 0\n",atoi(argv[1])); 
return -1; 
I* get the default attributes *I 
pthread_attr_init(&attr); 
I* create the thread *I 
pthread_create(&tid,&attr,runner,argv[1]); 
I* wait for the thread to exit *I 
pthread_join(tid,NULL); 
printf("sum = %d\n",sum); 
I* The thread will begin control in this function *I 
void *runner(void *param) 
{ 
} 
inti, upper= atoi(param); 
sum = 0; 
for (i = 1; i <= upper; i++) 
sum += i; 
pthread_exi t ( 0) ; 
Figure 4.9 Multithreaded C program using the Pthreads API. 
161 
operation in the runner() function. After creating the summation threadf 
the parent thread will wait for it to complete by calling the pthread_j oin () 
function. The summation thread will complete when it calls the function 
pthread_exi t (). Once the summation thread has returnedf the parent thread 
will output the value of the shared data sum. 

162 
Chapter 4 
4.3.2 Win32 Threads 
The technique for creating threads using the Win32 thread library is similar 
to the Pthreads technique in several ways. We illustrate the Win32 thread 
API in the C program shown in Figure 4.10. Notice that we must include the 
windows . h header file when using the Win32 API. 
Just as in the Pthreads version shown in Figure 4.9, data shared by the 
separate threads-in this case, Sum-are declared globally (the DWORD data 
type is an unsigned 32-bit integer). We also define the Summation() function 
that is to be performed in a separate thread. This function is passed a pointer to 
a void, which Win32 defines as LPVOID. The thread performing this function 
sets the global data Sum to the value of the summation from 0 to the parameter 
passed to Summation() . 
Threads are created in the Win32 API using the CreateThread () function, 
and-just as in Pthreads-a set of attributes for the thread is passed to this 
function. These attributes il1.clude security information, the size of the stack, 
and a flag that can be set to indicate if the thread is to start in a suspended 
state. In this program, we use the default values for these attributes (which do 
not initially set the thread to a suspended state and instead make it eligible 
to be rm1. by the CPU scheduler). Once the summation thread is created, the 
parent must wait for it to complete before outputting the value of Sum, as 
the value is set by the summation thread. Recall that the Pthread program 
(Figure 4.9) had the parent thread wait for the summation thread using the 
pthread_j oin () statement. We perform the equivalent of this in the Win32 API 
using the Wai tForSingleObj ect ()function, which causes the creatil1.gthread 
to block until the summation thread has exited. (We cover synchronization 
objects in more detail in Chapter 6.) 
4.3.3 Java Threads 
Tlu·eads are the fundamental model of program execution in a Java program, 
and the Java language and its API provide a rich set of features for the creation 
and management of threads. All Java programs comprise at least a single thread 
of control-even a simple Java program consisting of only a main() method 
runs as a single thread in the JVM. 
There are two teclmiques for creating threads in a Java program. One 
approach is to create a new class that is derived from the Thread class and 
to override its run() method. An alternative-and more commonly used-
teclmique is to define a class that implements the Runnable interface. The 
Runnable interface is defined as follows: 
public interface Runnable 
{ 
public abstract void run(); 
When a class implements Runnable, it must define a run() method. The code 
implementing the run() method is what runs as a separate thread. 
Figure 4.11 shows the Java version of a multithreaded program that 
determines the summation of a non-negative integer. The Summation class 
implements the Runnable interface. Thread creation is performed by creating 

4.3 
#include <Windows.h> 
#include <stdio.h> 
DWORD Sum; I* data is shared by the thread(s) *I 
I* the thread runs in this separate function *I 
DWORD WINAPI Sumrnation(LPVOID Param) 
{ 
} 
DWORD Upper = *(DWORD*)Param; 
for (DWORD i = 0; i <= Upper; i++) 
Sum += i; 
return 0; 
int main(int argc, char *argv[]) 
{ 
} 
DWORD Threadid; 
HANDLE ThreadHandle; 
int Param; 
I* perform some basic error checking *I 
if (argc != 2) { 
} 
fprintf(stderr,"An integer parameter is required\n"); 
return -1; 
Param = atoi(argv[1]); 
if (Param < 0) { 
} 
fprintf(stderr,"An integer>= 0 is required\n"); 
return -1; 
II create the thread 
ThreadHandle = CreateThread( 
NULL, II default security attributes 
0, II default stack size 
Summation, II thread function 
&Param, II parameter to thread function 
0, II default creation flags 
&Threadid); II returns the thread identifier 
if (ThreadHandle != NULL) { 
} 
II now wait for the thread to finish 
WaitForSingleObject(ThreadHandle,INFINITE); 
II close the thread handle 
CloseHandle(ThreadHandle); 
printf("surn = %d\n" ,Sum); 
Figure 4.10 Multithreaded C program using the Win32 API. 
163 

164 
Chapter 4 
class Sum 
{ 
} 
private int sum; 
public int getSum() { 
return sum; 
} 
public void setSum(int sum) { 
this.sum 
sum; 
} 
class Summation implements Runnable 
{ 
} 
private int upper; 
private Sum sumValue; 
public Summation(int upper, Sum sumValue) { 
this.upper = upper; 
this.sumValue = sumValue; 
} 
public void run() { 
int sum = 0; 
} 
for (int i = 0; i <= upper; i++) 
sum += i; 
sumValue.setSum(sum); 
public class Driver 
{ 
} 
public static void main(String[] args) { 
if (args.length > 0) { 
} 
if (Integer.parseint(args[O]) < 0) 
System.err.println(args[O] + "must be>= 0."); 
else { 
II create the object to be shared 
Sum sumObject = new Sum(); 
int upper= Integer.parseint(args[O]); 
Thread thrd =new Thread(new Summation(upper, sumObject)); 
thrd.start(); 
try { 
thrd. join () ; 
System.out.println 
("The sum of "+upper+" is "+sumObject.getSum()); 
} catch (InterruptedException ie) { } 
} 
else 
System.err.println("Usage: Summation <integer value>"); } 
Figure 4.11 
Java program for the summation of a non-negative integer. 

4.4 
4.4 
165 
an object instance of the Thread class and passing the constructor a Runnable 
object. 
Creating a Thread object does not specifically create the new thread; rather, 
it is the start() method that creates the new thread. Calling the start() 
method for the new object does two things: 
It allocates memory and initializes a new thread in the JVM. 
It calls the run() method, making the thread eligible to be run by the 
JVM. (Note that we never call the run() method directly. Rathel~ we call 
the start() method, and it calls the run() method on our behalf.) 
When the summation program runs, two threads are created by the JVM. 
The first is the parent thread, which starts execution in the main () method. 
The second thread is created when the start() method on the Thread object 
is invoked. This child thread begins execution in the run () method of the 
Summation class. After outputting the value of the summation, this thread 
terminates when it exits from its run() method. 
Sharing of data between threads occurs easily in Win32 and Pthreads, since 
shared data are simply declared globally. As a pure object-oriented language, 
Java has no such notion of global data; if two or more threads are to share 
data in a Java program, the sharing occurs by passing references to the shared 
object to the appropriate threads. In. the Java program shown in Figure 4.11, 
the main thread and the summation thread share the object instance of the Sum 
class. This shared object is referenced through the appropriate get Sum () and 
setSum() methods. (You might wonder why we don't use an Integer object 
rather than designing a new sum class. The reason is that the Integer class is 
immutable-that is, once its value is set, it cannot change.) 
Recall that the parent threads in the Pthreads and Win32 libraries use 
pthread_j oin () and Wai tForSingleDbj ect () (respectively) to wait for 
the summation threads to finish before proceeding. The join() method 
in Java provides similar functionality. (Notice that join() can throw an 
InterruptedException, which we choose to ignore.) 
In this section, we discuss some of the issues to consider with multithreaded 
programs. 
4.4.1 The fork() and exec() System Calls 
In Chapter 3, we described how the fork() system call is used to create a 
separate, duplicate process. The semantics of the fork() and exec() system 
calls change in a multithreaded program. 
If one thread in a program calls fork(), does the new process duplicate 
all threads, or is the new process single-threaded? Some UNIX systems have 
chosen to have two versions of fork(), one that duplicates all threads and 
another that duplicates only the thread that invoked the fork() system call. 
The exec() system call typically works in the same way as described 
in Chapter 3. That is, if a thread invokes the exec() system call, the program 

166 
Chapter 4 
The JVM and the Host Operating System 
The JVM is typically implemented on top of a host operating system (see 
Figure 2.20). This setup allows the JVM to hide the implementation details 
of the underlying operating system and to provide a consistent, abstract 
environment that allows Java programs to operate on any platform that 
supports a JVM. The specification for the JVM does not indicate how Java 
threads are to be mapped to the underlying operating system, instead leaving 
that decision to the particular implementation of the JVM. For example, the 
Windows XP operating system uses the one-to-one model; therefore, each 
Java thread for a JVM running on such a. system maps to .a kernel thread: On 
operating systems that use the many-to-many model (such as Tru64 UNIX), a 
Java thread is mapped according to the many-to-manymodel. Solaris initially 
implemented the JVM using themany~to-one model (the greenthreads library, 
mentioned earlier). Later releases of the JVM were implementedusing the 
many-to-:inany model. Beginning with Solaris 9, Java threads were mapped 
using the one~ to-one model. In addition, there may be a relationship between 
the Java thread library and the thread library on the host operating system. 
For .example, implementations of a JVM for the Windows family of operating 
systems might use the Win32 API when creating Java threads; Linux, Solaris, 
and Mac OS X systems might use the Pthreads API. 
specified in the parameter to exec () will replace the entire process-including 
all threads. 
Which of the two versions of fork() to use depends on the application. 
If exec() is called immediately after forking, then duplicating all threads is 
unnecessary, as the program specified in the parameters to exec() will replace 
the process. In this instance, duplicating only the calling thread is appropriate. 
If, however, the separate process does not call exec () after forking, the separate 
process should duplicate all threads. 
4.4.2 Cancellation 
""·"'''-'C'"''"·""'"" is the task of terminating a thread before it has completed. 
For example, if multiple threads are concurrently searching through a database 
and one thread returns the result, the remaining threads might be canceled. 
Another situation might occur when a user presses a button on a Web browser 
that stops a Web page from loading any further. Often, a Web page is loaded 
using several threads-each image is loaded in a separate thread. When a 
user presses the stop button on the browser, all threads loading the page are 
canceled. 
A thread that is to be canceled is often referred to as the 
Cancellation of a target thread may occur in two different scenarios: 
Asynchronous cancellation. One thread immediately terminates the 
target thread. 

4.4 
167 
Deferred cancellation. The target thread periodically checks whether it 
should terminate, allowing it an opportunity to terminate itself in an 
orderly fashion. 
The difficulty with cancellation occurs in situations where resources have 
been allocated to a canceled thread or where a thread is canceled while in 
the midst of updating data it is sharing with other threads. This becomes 
especially troublesome with asynchronous cancellation. Often, the operating 
system will reclaim system resources from a canceled thread but will not 
reclaim all resources. Therefore, canceling a thread asynchronously may not 
free a necessary system-wide resource. 
With deferred cancellation, in contrast, one thread indicates that a target 
thread is to be canceled, but cancellation occurs only after the target thread has 
checked a flag to determine whether or not it should be canceled. The thread 
can perform this check at a 
at which it can be canceled safely. Pthreads 
refers to such points as 
4.4.3 Signal Handling 
A 
is used in UNIX systems to notify a process that a particular event has 
occurred. A signal may be received either synchronously or asynchronously, 
depending on the source of and the reason for the event being signaled. All 
signals, whether synchronous or asynchronous, follow the same pattern: 
A signal is generated by the occurrence of a particular event. 
A generated signal is delivered to a process. 
Once delivered, the signal must be handled. 
Examples of synchronous signals include illegal memory access and 
division by 0. If a running program performs either of these actions, a signal 
is generated. Synchronous signals are delivered to the same process that 
performed the operation that caused the signal (that is the reason they are 
considered synchronous). 
When a signal is generated by an event external to a running process, that 
process receives the signal asynchronously. Examples of such signals include 
terminating a process with specific keystrokes (such as <control> <C>) and 
having a timer expire. Typically, an asynchronous signal is sent to another 
process. 
A signal may be handled by one of two possible handlers: 
A default signal handler 
A user-defilced signal handler 
Every signal has a 
that is run by the kernel when 
handling that signal. This default action can be overridden by a 
signal handle~ that is called to handle the signal. Signals are handled in 
different ways. Some signals (such as changing the size of a window) are 
simply ignored; others (such as an illegal memory access) are handled by 
terminating the program. 

168 
Chapter 4 
Handling signals in single-threaded programs is straightforward: signals 
are always delivered to a process. However, delivering signals is more 
complicated in multithreaded programs, where a process may have several 
threads. Where, then, should a signal be delivered? 
In generat the following options exist: 
Deliver the signal to the thread to which the signal applies. 
Deliver the signal to every thread in the process. 
Deliver the signal to certain threads in the process. 
Assign a specific thread to receive all signals for the process. 
The method for delivering a signal depends on the type of signal generated. 
For example, synchronous signals need to be delivered to the thread causing 
the signal and not to other threads in the process. However, the situation with 
asynchronous signals is not as clear. Some asynchronous signals-such as a 
signal that terminates a process ( <control><C>, for example)-should be 
sent to all threads. 
Most multithreaded versions of UNIX allow a thread to specify which 
signals it will accept and which it will block. Therefore, in some cases, an 
asynchronous signal may be delivered only to those threads that are not 
blocking it. However, because signals need to be handled only once, a signal 
is typically delivered only to the first thread found that is not blocking it. 
The standard UNIX function for delivering a signal is kill (pid_t pid, int 
signal), which specifies the process (pi d) to which a particular signal is to be 
delivered. POSIX Pthreads provides the pthread_kill (pthread_t tid, int 
signal) function, which allows a signal to be delivered to a specified thread 
(tid). 
Although Windows does not explicitly 
support for signals, they 
can be emulated using 
(APCs). The APC facility 
allows a user thread to specify a function that is to be called when the user 
thread receives notification of a particular event. As indicated by its name, 
an APC is roughly equivalent to an asynchronous signal in UNIX. However, 
whereas UNIX must contend with how to deal with signals in a multithreaded 
environment, the APC facility is more straightforward, since an APC is delivered 
to a particular thread rather than a process. 
4.4.4 Thread Pools 
In Section 4.1, we mentioned multithreading in a Web server. In this situation, 
whenever the server receives a request, it creates a separate thread to service 
the request. Whereas creating a separate thread is certainly superior to creating 
a separate process, a multithreaded server nonetheless has potential problems. 
The first issue concerns the amount of time required to create the thread prior 
to servicing the request, together with the fact that this thread will be discarded 
once it has completed its work. The second issue is more troublesome: if we 
allow all concurrent requests to be serviced in a new thread, we have not placed 
a bound on the number of threads concurrently active in the system. Unlimited 
threads could exhaust system resources, such as CPU tince or memory. One 
solution to this problem is to use a 

4.4 
169 
The general idea beh_ind a thread pool is to create a number of threads at 
process startup and place them into a pool, where they sit and wait for work. 
When a server receives a request, it awakens a thread from this pool-if one 
is available-and passes it the request for service. Once the thread completes 
its service, it returns to the pool and awaits more work. If the pool contains no 
available thread, the server waits until one becomes free. 
Thread pools offer these benefits: 
Servicing a request with an existing thread is usually faster than waiting 
to create a thread. 
A thread pool limits the number of threads that exist at any one point. 
This is particularly important on systems that cannot support a large 
number of concurrent threads. 
The number of threads in the pool can be set heuristically based on factors 
such as the number of CPUs in the system, the amount of physical memory, 
and the expected number of concurrent client requests. More sophisticated 
thread-pool architectures can dynamically adjust the number of threads in the 
pool according to usage patterns. Such architectures provide the further benefit 
of having a smaller pool-thereby consuming less memory-when the load 
on the system is low. 
The Win32 API provides several functions related to thread pools. Using 
the thread pool API is similar to creating a thread with the Thread Create() 
function, as described in Section 4.3.2. Here, a function that is to run as a 
separate thread is defin_ed. Such a function may appear as follows: 
DWORD WINAPI PoolFunction(AVOID Param) 
/** 
* this function runs as a separate thread. 
**/ 
A pointer to PoolFunction() is passed to one of the functions in the thread 
pool API, and a thread from the pool executes this function. One such member 
in the thread pool API is the QueueUserWorkitemO function, which is passed 
three paranceters: 
LPTHREAD_STARLROUTINE Function-a pointer to the function that is to 
nm as a separate thread 
PVOID Param-the parameter passed to Function 
ULONG Flags-flags indicating how the thread pool is to create and 
manage execution of the thread 
An example of invoking a function is: 
QueueUserWorkitem(&PoolFunction, NULL, 0); 
This causes a thread from the thread pool to invoke PoolFunction() 
on behalf of the programmer. In this instance, we pass no parameters to 

170 
Chapter 4 
-
lightweight process 
'-----'-'-----" 
d0~ 
kamalthcead 
Figure 4.12 Lightweight process (LWP). 
PoolFunction(). Because we specify 0 as a flag, we provide the thread pool 
with no special instructions for thread creation. 
Other members in the Win32 thread pool API include utilities that invoke 
functions at periodic intervals or when an asynchronous I/0 request completes. 
The java. util. concurrent package in Java 1.5 provides a thread pool utility 
as welL 
4.4.5 Thread-Specific Data 
Threads belonging to a process share the data of the process. Indeed, this 
sharing of data provides one of the benefits of multithreaded programming. 
However, in some circumstances, each thread 
need its own copy of 
certain data. We will call such data 
For example, in a 
transaction-processing system, we might service each transaction in a separate 
thread. Furthermore, each transaction might be assigned a unique identifier. To 
associate each thread with its unique identifier, we could use thread-specific 
data. Most thread libraries-including Win32 and Pthreads-provide some 
form of support for thread-specific data. Java provides support as well. 
4.4.6 Scheduler Activations 
A final issue to be considered with multithreaded programs concerns com-
munication between the kernel and the thread library, which may be required 
by the many-to-many and two-level models discussed in Section 4.2.3. Such 
coordination allows the number of kernel threads to be dynamically adjusted 
to help ensure the best performance. 
Many systems implementing either the many-to-many or the two-level 
model place an intermediate data structure between the user and kernel 
threads. This data structure-typically known as a lightweight process, or 
LWP-is shown in Figure 4.12. To the user-thread library, the LWP appears to 
be a virtual processor on which the application can schedule a user thread to 
run. Each LWP is attached to a kernel thread, and it is kernel threads that the 
operating system schedules to run on physical processors. If a kernel thread 
blocks (such as while waiting for an I/0 operation to complete), the LWP blocks 
as well. Up the chain, the user-level thread attached to the LWP also blocks. 
An application may require any number of LWPs to run efficiently. Consider 
a CPU-bound application running on a single processor. In this scenario, only 

4.5 
4.5 
171 
one thread can run at once, so one LWP is sufficient. An application that is I/O-
intensive may require multiple LWPs to execute, however. Typically, an LWP is 
required for each concurrent blocking system call. Suppose, for example, that 
five different file-read requests occur simultaneously. Five LWPs are needed, 
because all could be waiting for I/0 completion in the kernel. If a process has 
only four LWPs, then the fifth request must wait for one of the LWPs to return 
from the kernel. 
One scheme for communication between the user-thread library and the 
kernel is known as 
It works as follows: The kernel 
provides an application with a set of virtual processors (LWPs), and the 
application can schedule user threads onto an available virtual processor. 
Furthermore, the kernel must inform an application about certain events. This 
procedure is known as an 
Upcalls are handled by the thread library 
with an 
and upcall handlers must run on a virtual processor. 
One event that triggers an upcall occurs when an application thread is about to 
block. In this scenario, the kernel makes an upcall to the application informing 
it that a thread is about to block and identifying the specific thread. The kernel 
then allocates a new virtual processor to the application. The application runs 
an upcall handler on this new virtual processor, which saves the state of the 
blocking thread and relinquishes the virtual processor on which the blocking 
thread is running. The upcall handler then schedules another thread that is 
eligible to run on the new virtual processor. When the event that the blocking 
thread was waiting for occurs, the kernel makes another upcall to the thread 
library informilcg it that the previously blocked thread is now eligible to run. 
The up call handler for this event also requires a virtual processor, and the kernel 
may allocate a new virtual processor or preempt one of the user threads and 
run the upcall handler on its virtual processor. After marking the 1-mblocked 
thread as eligible to run, the application schedules an eligible thread to run on 
an available virtual processor. 
In this section, we explore how threads are implemented in Windows XP and 
Linux systems. 
4.5.1 Windows XP Threads 
Windows XP implements the Win32 API, which is the primary API for the 
family of Microsoft operating systems (Windows 95, 98, NT, 2000, and XP). 
Indeed, much of what is mentioned in this section applies to this entire family 
of operating systems. 
A Windows XP application runs as a separate process, and each process 
may contain one or more threads. The Win32 API for creating threads is 
covered in Section 4.3.2. Windows XP uses the one-to-one mapping described 
in Section 4.2.2, where each user-level thread maps to an associated kernel 
thread. However, Windows XP also provides support for a 
library, which 
provides the functionality of the many-to-many model (Section 4.2.3). By using 
the thread library, any thread belonging to a process can access the address 
space of the process. 

5.1 
CPU scheduling is the basis of multiprogrammed operating systems. By 
switching the CPU among processes, the operating system can make the 
computer more productive. In this chapter, we introduce basic CPU-scheduling 
concepts and present several CPU-scheduling algorithms. We also consider the 
problem of selecting an algorithm for a particular system. 
In Chapter 4, we introduced threads to the process model. On operating 
systems that support them., it is kernel-level threads-not processes-that are 
in fact being scheduled by the operating system. However, the terms process 
scheduling and thread scheduling are often used interchangeably. In this 
chapter, we use process scheduling when discussing general scheduling concepts 
and thread scheduling to refer to thread-specific ideas. 
To introduce CPU scheduling, which is the basis for multiprogrammed 
operating systems. 
To describe various CPU-scheduling algorithms. 
To discuss evaluation criteria for selecting a CPU-scheduling algorithm for 
a particular system. 
In a single-processor system, only one process can run at a time; any others 
must wait until the CPU is free and can be rescheduled. The objective of 
multiprogramming is to have some process rum1ing at all times, to maximize 
CPU utilization. The idea is relatively simple. A process is executed until 
it must wait, typically for the completion of some I/O request. In a simple 
computer system, the CPU then just sits idle. All this waiting time is wasted; 
no useful work is accomplished. With multiprogramming, we try to use this 
time productively. Several processes are kept in memory at one time. When 
one process has to wait, the operating system takes the CPU away from that 
183 

184 
Chapter 5 
load store 
add store 
read from file 
wait for 110 
store increment 
index 
write to file 
wait for 1/0 
load store 
add store 
read from file 
[ 
Wait.tor;l/0 
CPU burst 
1/0 burst 
CPU burst 
1/0 burst 
CPU burst 
1/0 burst 
Figure 5.i Alternating sequence of CPU and 1/0 bursts. 
process and gives the CPU to another process. This pattern continues. Every 
time one process has to wait, another process can take over use of the CPU. 
Scheduling of this kind is a fundamental operating-system function. 
Almost all computer resources are scheduled before use. The CPU is, of course, 
one of the primary computer resources. Thus, its scheduling is central to 
operating-system design. 
5.1.1 CPU-i/O Burst Cycle 
The success of CPU scheduling depends on an observed property of processes: 
process execution consists of a cycle of CPU execution and I/0 wait. Processes 
alternate between these two states. Process execution begins with a CPU burst. 
That is followed by an I/O burst, which is followed by another CPU burst, then 
another I/0 burst, and so on. Eventually, the final CPU burst ends with a system 
request to terminate execution (Figure 5.1). 
The durations of CPU bursts have been measured extensively. Although 
they vary greatly from process to process and from computer to compute1~ 
they tend to have a frequency curve similar to that shown in Figure 5.2. The 
curve is generally characterized as exponential or hyperexponential, with a 
large number of short CPU bursts and a small number of long CPU bursts. 
An I/O-bound program typically has many short CPU bursts. A CPU-bound 

5.1 
185 
160 
140 
120 
>- 100 
0 c 
aJ 
:::l 
u 
80 
~ 
60 
40 
20 
0 
8 
16 
24 
32 
40 
burst duration (milliseconds) 
Figure 5.2 Histogram of CPU-burst durations. 
program might have a few long CPU bursts. This distribution can be important 
in the selection of an appropriate CPU-scheduling algorithm. 
5.1.2 CPU Scheduler 
Whenever the CPU becomes idle, the operating system must select one of the 
processes in the ready queue to be executed. The selection process is carried 
out by the short-term scheduler (or CPU scheduler). The scheduler selects a 
process from the processes in memory that are ready to execute and allocates 
the CPU to that process. 
Note that the ready queue is not necessarily a first-in, first-out (FIFO) queue. 
As we shall see when we consider the various scheduling algorithms, a ready 
queue can be implen<ented as a FIFO queue, a priority queue, a tree, or sirnply 
an unordered linked list. Conceptually, howeve1~ all the processes in the ready 
queue are lined up waiting for a chance to run on the CPU. The records in the 
queues are generally process control blocks (PCBs) of the processes. 
5.1.3 Preemptive Scheduling 
CPU-scheduling decisions may take place under the following four circum-
stances: 
When a process switches from the running state to the waiting state (for 
example, as the result of an I/0 request or an invocation of wait for the 
termination of one of the child processes) 
When a process switches from the numing state to the ready state (for 
example, when an interrupt occurs) 

186 
Chapter 5 
When a process switches from the waiting state to the ready state (for 
example, at completion of I/0) 
When a process terminates 
For situations 1 and 4, there is no choice in terms of scheduling. A new process 
(if one exists in the ready queue) must be selected for execution. There is a 
choice, however, for situations 2 and 3. 
When scheduling takes place only under circumstances 1 and 4, we say 
that the scheduling scheme is nonpreemptive or cooperative; otherwise, it 
is preemptive. Under nonpreemptive scheduling, once the CPU has been 
allocated to a process, the process keeps the CPU until it releases the CPU either 
by terminating or by switching to the waiting state. This scheduling method 
was used by Microsoft Windows 3.x; Windows 95 introduced preemptive 
scheduling, and all subsequent versions of Windows operating systems have 
used preemptive scheduling. The Mac OS X operating system for the Macintosh 
also uses preemptive scheduling; previous versions of the Macintosh operating 
system relied on cooperative scheduling. Cooperative scheduling is the only 
method that can be used on certain hardware platforms, because it does not 
require the special hardware (for example, a timer) needed for preemptive 
scheduling. 
Unfortunately, preemptive scheduling incurs a cost associated with access 
to shared data. Consider the case of two processes that share data. While one 
is updating the data, it is preempted so that the second process can run. The 
second process then tries to read the data, which are in an inconsistent state. In 
such situations, we need new mechanisms to coordinate access to shared data; 
we discuss this topic in Chapter 6. 
Preemption also affects the design of the operating-system kernel. During 
the processing of a system call, the kernel may be busy with an activity on 
behalf of a process. Such activities may involve changing important kernel 
data (for instance, I/0 queues). What happens if the process is preempted 
in the middle of these changes and the kernel (or the device driver) needs 
to read or modify the same structure? Chaos ensues. Certain operating sys-
tems, including most versions of UNIX, deal with this problem by waiting 
either for a system call to com.plete or for an I/O block to take place before 
doing a context switch. This scheme ensures that the kernel structure is 
simple, since the kernel will not preempt a process while the kernel data 
structures are in an inconsistent state. Unfortunately, this kernel-execution 
model is a poor one for supportil1g real-time computing and multipro-
cessing. These problems, and their solutions, are described i.J.1 Sections 5.5 
and 19.5. 
Because interrupts can, by definition, occur at any time, and because 
they cannot always be ignored by the kernel, the sections of code affected 
by interrupts must be guarded from simultaneous use. The operating system 
needs to accept interrupts at almost all times; otherwise, input might be lost or 
output overwritten. So that these sections of code are not accessed concurrently 
by several processes, they disable interrupts at entry and reenable interrupts 
at exit. It is important to note that sections of code that disable interrupts do 
not occur very often and typically contain few instructions. 

5.2 
5.2 
187 
5.1.4 Dispatcher 
Another component involved in the CPU-scheduling function is the dispatcher. 
The dispatcher is the module that gives control of the CPU to the process selected 
by the short-term scheduler. This function involves the following: 
Switching context 
Switching to user mode 
Jumping to the proper location in the user program to restart that program 
The dispatcher should be as fast as possible, since it is invoked during every 
process switch. The time it takes for the dispatcher to stop one process and 
start another running is known as the dispatch latency. 
Different CPU-scheduling algorithms have different properties, and the choice 
of a particular algorithm may favor one class of processes over another. In 
choosing which algorithm to use in a particular situation, we must consider 
the properties of the various algorithms. 
Many criteria have been suggested for comparing CPU-scheduling algo-
rithms. Which characteristics are used for comparison can make a substantial 
difference in which algorithm is judged to be best. The criteria include the 
following: 
CPU utilization. We want to keep the CPU as busy as possible. Concep-
tually, CPU utilization can range from 0 to 100 percent. In a real system, it 
should range from 40 percent (for a lightly loaded system) to 90 percent 
(for a heavily used system). 
Throughput. If the CPU is busy executing processes, then work is being 
done. One measure of work is the number of processes that are completed 
per time unit, called throughput. For long processes, this rate may be one 
process per hour; for short transactions, it may be ten processes per second. 
Turnaround time. From the point of view of a particular process, the 
important criterion is how long it takes to execute that process. The interval 
from the time of submission of a process to the time of completion is the 
turnaround time. Turnaround tim.e is the sum of the periods spent waiting 
to get into memory, waiting in the ready queue, executing on the CPU, and 
doing I/0. 
Waiting time. The CPU-scheduling algorithm does not affect the amount 
of time during which a process executes or does I/0; it affects only the 
an1.ount of time that a process spends waiting in the ready queue. Waiting 
time is the sum of the periods spent waiting in the ready queue. 
Response time. In an interactive system, turnaround time may not be 
the best criterion. Often, a process can produce some output fairly early 
and can continue computing new results while previous results are being 

188 
Chapter 5 
5.3 
output to the user. Thus, another measure is the time from the submission 
of a request until the first response is produced. This measure, called 
response time, is the tince it takes to start responding, not the time it takes 
to output the response. The turnaround time is generally limited by the 
speed of the output device. 
It is desirable to maximize CPU utilization and throughput and to minirnize 
turnaround time, waiting time, and response time. In most cases, we optimize 
the average measure. However, under some circumstances, it is desirable 
to optimize the minimum or maximum values rather than the average. For 
example, to guarantee that all users get good service, we may want to minirnize 
the maximum response time. 
Investigators have suggested that, for interactive systems (such as time-
sharing systerns), it is more important to minimize the variance in the response 
time than to minimize the average response time. A system with reasonable 
and predictable response time may be considered more desirable than a system 
that is faster on the average but is highly variable. Howeve1~ little work has 
been done on CPU-scheduling algorithms that minimize variance. 
As we discuss various CPU-scheduling algorithms in the following section, 
we illustrate their operation. An accurate illustration should involve many 
processes, each a sequence of several hundred CPU bursts and I/O bursts. 
For simplicity, though, we consider only one CPU burst (in milliseconds) per 
process in our examples. Our measure of comparison is the average waiting 
time. More elaborate evaluation mechanisms are discussed in Section 5.7. 
CPU scheduling deals with the problem of deciding which of the processes in the 
ready queue is to be allocated the CPU. There are many different CPU-scheduling 
algorithms. In this section, we describe several of them. 
5.3.1 First-Come, First-Served Scheduling 
By far the simplest CPU-scheduling algorithm is the first-come, first-served 
(FCFS) scheduling algorithm. With this scheme, the process that requests the 
CPU first is allocated the CPU first. The implementation of the FCFS policy is 
easily managed with a FIFO queue. When a process enters the ready queue, its 
PCB is linked onto the tail of the queue. When the CPU is free, it is allocated to 
the process at the head of the queue. The running process is then removed from 
the queue. The code for FCFS scheduling is simple to write and understand. 
On the negative side, the average waiting time under the FCFS policy is 
often quite long. Consider the following set of processes that arrive at time 0, 
with the length of the CPU burst given in milliseconds: 
Process 
Burst Time 
-----
p] 
24 
p2 
3 
Po 
:) 
3 

5.3 
189 
If the processes ani ve in the order P1, P2, P3, and are served in FCFS order, 
we get the result shown in the following Gantt chart, which is a bar chart that 
illustrates a particular schedule, including the start and finish times of each of 
the participating processes: 
0 
24 
27 
30 
The waiting time is 0 milliseconds for process P1, 24 milliseconds for process 
P2, and 27 milliseconds for process P3 . Thus, the average waiting time is (0 
+ 24 + 27)/3 = 17 ncilliseconds. If the processes arrive in the order P2, P3, P1, 
however, the results will be as shown in the following Gantt chart: 
0 
3 
6 
30 
The average waiting time is now (6 + 0 + 3)/3 = 3 milliseconds. This reduction 
is substantial. Thus, the average waiting time under an FCFS policy is generally 
not minimal and may vary substantially if the processes CPU burst times vary 
greatly. 
In addition, consider the performance of FCFS scheduling in a dynamic 
situation. Assume we have one CPU-bound process and many I/O-bound 
processes. As the processes flow armmd the system, the following scenario 
may result. The CPU-bound process will get and hold the CPU. During this 
time, all the other processes will finish their I/0 and will move into the ready 
queue, waiting for the CPU. While the processes wait in the ready queue, the 
I/0 devices are idle. Eventually, the CPU-bound process finishes its CPU burst 
and moves to an I/0 device. All the I/O-bound processes, which have short 
CPU bursts, execute quickly and move back to the I/0 queues. At this point, 
the CPU sits idle. The CPU-bound process will then move back to the ready 
queue and be allocated the CPU. Again, all the I/0 processes end up waiting in 
the ready queue until the CPU-bound process is done. There is a convoy effect 
as all the other processes wait for the one big process to get off the CPU. This 
effect results in lower CPU and device utilization than might be possible if the 
shorter processes were allowed to go first. 
Note also that the FCFS scheduling algorithm is nonpreemptive. Once the 
CPU has been allocated to a process, that process keeps the CPU until it releases 
the CPU, either by terminating or by requesting I/0. The FCFS algorithm is thus 
particularly troublesome for time-sharing systems, where it is important that 
each user get a share of the CPU at regular intervals. It would be disastrous to 
allow one process to keep the CPU for an extended period. 
5.3.2 Shortest-Job-First Scheduling 
A different approach to CPU scheduling is the shortest-job-first (SJF) schedul-
ing algorithm. This algorithm associates with each process the length of the 
process's next CPU burst. When the CPU is available, it is assigned to the process 

190 
Chapter 5 
that has the smallest next CPU burst. If the next CPU bursts of two processes are 
the same, FCFS scheduling is used to break the tie. Note that a more appropriate 
term for this scheduling method would be the shortest-next-CPU-burst algorithm, 
because scheduling depends on the length of the next CPU burst of a process, 
rather than its total length. We use the term SJF because m.ost people and 
textbooks use this term to refer to this type of scheduling. 
As an example of SJF scheduling, consider the following set of processes, 
with the length of the CPU burst given in milliseconds: 
Process 
Burst Time 
pl 
6 
p2 
8 
p3 
7 
p4 
3 
Using SJF scheduling, we would schedule these processes according to the 
following Gantt chart: 
0 
3 
9 
16 
24 
The waiting time is 3 milliseconds for process P1, 16 milliseconds for process 
P2, 9 milliseconds for process P3, and 0 milliseconds for process P4 . Thus, the 
average waiting time is (3 + 16 + 9 + 0) I 4 = 7 milliseconds. By comparison, if 
we were using the FCFS scheduling scheme, the average waiting time would 
be 10.25 milliseconds. 
The SJF scheduling algorithm is provably optimal, in that it gives the 
minimum average waiting time for a given set of processes. Moving a short 
process before a long one decreases the waiting time of the short process more 
than it increases the waiting time of the long process. Consequently, the average 
waiting time decreases. 
The real difficulty with the SJF algorithm is knowing the length of the next 
CPU request. For long-term (job) scheduling in a batch system, we can use as 
the length the process time limit that a user specifies when he submits the 
job. Thus, users are motivated to estimate the process time limit accurately, 
since a lower value may mean faster response. (Too low a value will cause 
a time-limit-exceeded error and require resubmission.) SJF scheduling is used 
frequently in long-term scheduling. 
Although the SJF algorithm is optimal, it cannot be implemented at the level 
of short-term CPU scheduling. With short-term scheduling, there is no way to 
know the length of the next CPU burst. One approach is to try to approximate 
SJF scheduling. We may not know the length of the next CPU burst, but we may 
be able to predict its value. We expect that the next CPU burst will be similar 
in length to the previous ones. By computing an approximation of the length 
of the next CPU burst, we can pick the process with the shortest predicted CPU 
burst. 

5.3 
191 
The next CPU burst is generally predicted as an exponential average of 
the measured lengths of previous CPU bursts. We can define the exponential 
average with the following formula. Let t11 be the length of the nth CPU burst, 
and let T11+t be our predicted value for the next CPU burst. Then, for a, 0 :s a < 
1, define 
The value of tn contains our most recent information; T11 stores the past history. 
The parameter a controls the relative weight of recent and past history in 
our prediction. If a= 0, then Tn+l = T11, and recent history has no effect (current 
conditions are assumed to be transient). If a= 1, then Tn+l = t11 , and only the most 
recent CPU burst matters (history is assumed to be old and irrelevant). More 
commonly, a= 1/2, so recent history and past history are equally weighted. 
The initial To can be defined as a constant or as an overall system average. 
Figure 5.3 shows an exponential average with a= 1/2 and To= 10. 
To Lmderstand the behavior of the exponential average, we can expand the 
formula for Tn+l by substituting for T 11, to find 
) 
j 
JJ ' 1 
Tn+l = atn + (1 -
a atn-1 + · · · + (1- a) atn-j + · · · + (1- a) 'To. 
Since both a and (1 -
a) are less than or equal to 1, each successive term has 
less weight than its predecessor. 
The SJF algorithm can be either preemptive or nonpreemptive. The choice 
arises when a new process arrives at the ready queue while a previous process is 
still executing. The next CPU burst of the newly arrived process may be shorter 
time---+ 
CPU burst (f) 
6 
4 
6 
4 
13 
13 
13 
"guess" (T;) 
10 
8 
6 
6 
5 
9 
1 1 
12 
Figure 5.3 Prediction of the length of the next CPU burst. 

192 
Chapter 5 
than what is left of the currently executing process. A preemptive SJF algorithm 
will preempt the currently executing process, whereas a nonpreemptive SJF 
algorithm will allow the currently running process to finish its CPU burst. 
Preemptive SJF scheduling is sometimes called shortest-remaining-time-first 
scheduling. 
As an example, consider the following four processes, with the length of 
the CPU burst given in milliseconds: 
Process 
Arrival Time 
Burst Time 
pl 
0 
8 
p2 
1 
4 
p3 
2 
9 
p4 
3 
5 
If the processes arrive at the ready queue at the times shown and need the 
indicated burst times, then the resulting preemptive SJF schedule is as depicted 
in the following Gantt chart: 
0 
5 
10 
17 
26 
Process P1 is started at time 0, since it is the only process in the queue. Process 
P2 arrives at time 1. The remaining time for process P1 (7 milliseconds) is 
larger than the time required by process P2 (4 milliseconds), so process P1 is 
preempted, and process P2 is scheduled. The average waiting time for this 
example is [(10- 1) + (1 - 1) + (17- 2) +(5-3)]/ 4 = 26/4 = 6.5 milliseconds. 
Nonpreemptive SJF scheduling would result in an average waiting time of 7.75 
milliseconds. 
5.3.3 Priority Scheduling 
The SJF algorithm is a special case of the general priority scheduling algorithm. 
A priority is associated with each process, and the CPU is allocated to the process 
with the highest priority. Equal-priority processes are scheduled in FCFS order. 
An SJF algorithm is simply a priority algorithm where the priority (p) is the 
inverse of the (predicted) next CPU burst. The larger the CPU burst, the lower 
the priority, and vice versa. 
Note that we discuss scheduling in terms of high priority and low priority. 
Priorities are generally indicated by some fixed range of numbers, such as 0 
to 7 or 0 to 4,095. However, there is no general agreement on whether 0 is the 
highest or lowest priority. Some systems use low numbers to represent low 
priority; others use low numbers for high priority. This difference can lead to 
confusion. In this text, we assume that low numbers represent high priority. 
As an example, consider the following set of processes, assumed to have 
arrived at time 0 in the order P1, P2, · · ·, Ps, with the length of the CPU burst 
given in milliseconds: 

5.3 
193 
Process 
Burst Time 
~[~()rity 
pl 
10 
,., 
0 
p2 
1 
1 
p3 
2 
4 
p4 
1 
5 
Ps 
5 
2 
Using priority scheduling, we would schedule these processes according to the 
following Gantt chart: 
0 
6 
16 
18 19 
The average waiting time is 8.2 milliseconds. 
Priorities can be defined either internally or externally. Internally defined 
priorities use some nceasurable quantity or quantities to compute the priority 
of a process. For example, time limits, memory requirements, the number of 
open files, and the ratio of average I/0 burst to average CPU burst have been 
used in computing priorities. External priorities are set by criteria outside the 
operating system, such as the importance of the process, the type and amount 
of funds being paid for computer use, the department sponsoring the work, 
and other, often politicat factors. 
Priority scheduling can be either preemptive or nonpreemptive. When a 
process arrives at the ready queue, its priority is compared with the priority 
of the currently running process. A preemptive priority scheduling algorithm 
will preempt the CPU if the priority of the newly arrived process is higher 
than the priority of the currently running process. A nonpreemptive priority 
scheduling algorithm will simply put the new process at the head of the ready 
queue. 
A rnajor problem with priority scheduling algorithms is indefinite block-
ing, or starvation. A process that is ready to run but waiting for the CPU can 
be considered blocked. A priority scheduling algorithm can leave some low-
priority processes waiting indefinitely. In a heavily loaded computer system, a 
steady stream of higher-priority processes can prevent a low-priority process 
from ever getting the CPU. Generally, one of two things will happen. Either the 
process will eventually be run (at 2 A.M. Sunday, when the system is finally 
lightly loaded), or the cornputer systern will eventually crash and lose all 
unfinished low-priority processes. (Rumor has it that when they shut down 
the IBM 7094 at MIT in 1973, they found a low-priority process that had been 
submitted in 1967 and had not yet been run.) 
A solution to the problem of indefinite blockage of low-priority processes 
is aging. Aging is a techniqtJe of gradually increasing the priority of processes 
that wait in the system for a long time. For example, if priorities range from 
127 (low) to 0 (high), we could increase the priority of a waiting process by 
1 every 15 minutes. Eventually, even a process with an initial priority of 127 
would have the highest priority in the system and would be executed. In fact, 
it would take no more than 32 hours for a priority-127 process to age to a 
priority-0 process. 

194 
Chapter 5 
5.3.4 Round-Robin Scheduling 
The round-robin (RR) scheduling algorithm is designed especially for time-
sharing systems. It is similar to FCFS scheduling, but preemption is added to 
enable the system to switch between processes. A small unit of time, called a 
time quantum or time slice, is defined. A time quantum is generally fronc 10 
to 100 milliseconds in length. The ready queue is treated as a circular queue. 
The CPU scheduler goes around the ready queue, allocating the CPU to each 
process for a time interval of up to 1 time quantum. 
To implement RR scheduling, we keep the ready queue as a FIFO queue o£ 
processes. New processes are added to the tail of the ready queue. The CPU 
scheduler picks the first process from the ready queue, sets a timer to interrupt 
after 1 time quantum, and dispatches the process. 
One of two things will then happen. The process may have a CPU burst of 
less than 1 time quantum. In this case, the process itself will release the CPU 
voluntarily. The scheduler will then proceed to the next process in the ready 
queue. Otherwise, if the CPU burst of the currently running process is longer 
than 1 time quantum, the timer will go off and will cause an interrupt to the 
operating system. A context switch will be executed, and the process will be 
put at the tail o£ the ready queue. The CPU scheduler will then select the next 
process in the ready queue. 
The average waiting time under the RR policy is often long. Consider the 
following set of processes that arrive at time 0, with the length of the CPU burst 
given in milliseconds: 
Process 
Burst Time 
If we use a time quantum of 4 milliseconds, then process P1 gets the first 4 
milliseconds. Since it requires another 20 milliseconds, it is preempted after 
the first time quantum, and the CPU is given to the next process in the queue, 
process P2 . Process P2 does not need 4 milliseconds, so it quits before its time 
quantum expires. The CPU is then given to the next process, process P3. Once 
each process has received 1 time quantum, the CPU is returned to process P1 
for an additional time quantum. The resulting RR schedule is as follows: 
0 
4 
7 
10 
14 
18 
22 
26 
30 
Let's calculate the average waiting time for the above schedule. P1 waits for 6 
millisconds (10- 4), P2 waits for 4 millisconds, and P3 waits for 7 millisconds. 
Thus, the average waiting time is 17/3 = 5.66 milliseconds. 
In the RR scheduling algorithm, no process is allocated the CPU for more 
than 1 time quantum in a row (unless it is the only runnable process). If a 

5.3 
195 
process's CPU burst exceeds 1 time quantum, that process is preempted and is 
p11t back in the ready queue. The RR scheduling algorithm is thus preemptive. 
If there are n. processes in the ready queue and the time quantum is q, 
then each process gets 1 In of the CPU time in chunks of at most q time units. 
Each process must wait no longer than (11 -
1) x q time units until its 
next time quantum. For example, with five processes and a time quantum of 20 
milliseconds, each process will get up to 20 milliseconds every 100 milliseconds. 
The performance of the RR algorithm depends heavily on the size of the 
time quantum. At one extreme, if the time quantum is extremely large, the 
RR policy is the same as the FCFS policy. In contrast, if the time quantum 
is extremely small (say, 1 millisecond), the RR approach is called processor 
sharing and (in theory) creates the appearance that each of 11 processes has its 
own processor running at 1 I 11 the speed of the real processor. This approach 
was used in Control Data Corporation (CDC) hardware to implement ten 
peripheral processors with only one set of hardware and ten sets of registers. 
The hardware executes one instruction for one set of registers, then goes on to 
the next. This cycle continues, resulting in ten slow processors rather than one 
fast one. (Actually, since the processor was much faster than memory and each 
instruction referenced memory, the processors were not much slower than ten 
real processors would have been.) 
In software, we need also to consider the effect of context switching on the 
performance of RR scheduling. Assume, for example, that we have only one 
process of 10 time units. If the quantum is 12 time units, the process finishes 
in. less than 1 time quantum, with no overhead. If the quantum is 6 time units, 
however, the process requires 2 quanta, resulting in a context switch. If the 
time quantum is 1 time unit, then nine context switches will occur, slowing the 
execution of the process accordingly (Figure 5.4). 
Thus, we want the time quantum to be large with respect to the context-
switch time. If the context-switch time is approximately 10 percent of the 
time quantum, then about 10 percent of the CPU time will be spent in context 
switching. In practice, most modern systems have time quanta ranging from 
10 to 100 milliseconds. The time required for a context switch is typically less 
than 10 microseconds; thus, the context-switch time is a small fraction of the 
time quantum. 
process time = 10 
quantum 
context 
switches 
12 
0 
0 
10 
6 
0 
6 
10 
r.r >r-.· ... r •. ·r .•. ·-···.r· 
r-···-lr·-··-r··•··r 
9 
0 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
Figure 5.4 How a smaller time quantum increases context switches. 

196 
Chapter 5 
process 
time 
12.5 
.P1 
6 
12.0 
Pz 
3 
p3 
1 
Q) 11.5 
P4. 
7 
E 
·.;::; 
"0 
c 
11.0 
::J 
0 
(a 10.5 
E 
.2 
Q) 10.0 
en 
~ 
Q) > 
9.5 
C1l 
9.0 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
time quantum 
Figure 5.5 How turnaround time varies with the time quantum. 
Turnaround time also depends on the size of the time quantum. As we 
can see from Figure 5.5, the average turnaround time of a set of processes 
does not necessarily improve as the time-quantum size increases. In general, 
the average turnaround time can be improved if most processes finish their 
next CPU burst in a single time quantum. For example, given three processes 
of 10 time units each and a quantum of 1 time unit, the average turnaround 
time is 29. If the time quantum is 10, however, the average turnaround time 
drops to 20. If context-switch time is added in, the average turnaround time 
increases even more for a smaller time quantum, since more context switches 
are required. 
Although the time quantum should be large compared with the context-
switch time, it should not be too large. If the time quantum is too large, RR 
scheduling degenerates to an FCFS policy. A rule of thumb is that 80 percent of 
the CPU bursts should be shorter than the time quantum. 
5.3.5 Multilevel Queue Scheduling 
Another class of scheduling algorithms has been created for situations in 
which processes are easily classified into different groups. For example, a 
common division is made between foreground (interactive) processes and 
background (batch) processes. These two types of processes have different 
response-time requirements and so may have different scheduling needs. In 
addition, foreground processes may have priority (externally defined) over 
background processes. 
A multilevel queue scheduling algorithm partitions the ready queue into 
several separate queues (Figure 5.6). The processes are permanently assigned to 
one queue, generally based on some property of the process, such as memory 

5.3 
197 
highest priority 
====~'-------'i-'-n_te_r~ac_t_iv_e_e...:.d_it~in_g'-'-p~r-.o'-c_·e'---ss~e-s"--------"--'-'---l====i> 
======~'---------'b_a_tc_h_p_r_o_ce_s_s_e_s ______ _J======~> 
======·~'-------s_tu_d_e_n_t_p_ro_c_e_s_s_es _____ __jl======i> 
lowest priority 
Figure 5.6 Multilevel queue scheduling. 
size, process priority, or process type. Each queue has its own scheduling 
algorithm. For example, separate queues might be used for foreground and 
background processes. The foreground queue might be scheduled by an RR 
algorithm, while the background queue is scheduled by an FCFS algorithm. 
In addition, there must be scheduling among the queues, which is com-
monly implemented as fixed-priority preemptive scheduling. For example, the 
foreground queue may have absolute priority over the background queue. 
Let's look at an example of a multilevel queue scheduling algorithm with 
five queues, listed below in order of priority: 
System processes 
Interactive processes 
Interactive editing processes 
Batch processes 
Student processes 
Each queue has absolute priority over lower-priority queues. No process in the 
batch queue, for example, could run unless the queues for system processes, 
interactive processes, and interactive editing processes were all empty. If an 
interactive editing process entered the ready queue while a batch process was 
running, the batch process would be preempted. 
Another possibility is to time-slice among the queues. Here, each queue gets 
a certain portion of the CPU time, which it can then schedule among its various 
processes. For instance, in the foreground-background queue example, the 
foreground queue can be given 80 percent of the CPU time for RR scheduling 
among its processes, whereas the background queue receives 20 percent of the 
CPU to give to its processes on an FCFS basis. 

198 
Chapter 5 
5.3.6 Multilevel Feedback Queue Scheduling 
Normally, when the multilevel queue scheduling algorithm is used, processes 
are permanently assigned to a queue when they enter the system. If there 
are separate queues for foreground and background processes, for example, 
processes do not move from one queue to the other, since processes do not 
change their foreground or background nature. This setup has the advantage 
of low scheduling overhead, but it is inflexible. 
The multilevel feedback queue scheduling algorithm, in contrast, allows 
a process to move between queues. The idea is to separate processes according 
to the characteristics of their CPU bursts. If a process uses too much CPU time, 
it will be moved to a lower-priority queue. This scheme leaves I/O-bound and 
interactive processes in the higher-priority queues. In addition, a process that 
waits too long in a lower-priority queue may be moved to a higher-priority 
queue. This form of aging prevents starvation. 
For example, consider a multilevel feedback queue scheduler with three 
queues, numbered from 0 to 2 (Figure 5.7). The scheduler first executes all 
processes in queue 0. Only when queue 0 is empty will it execute processes 
in queue 1. Similarly, processes in queue 2 will only be executed if queues 0 
and 1 are empty. A process that arrives for queue 1 will preempt a process in 
queue 2. A process in queue 1 will in turn be preempted by a process arriving 
for queue 0. 
A process entering the ready queue is put in queue 0. A process in queue 0 
is given a time quantum of 8 milliseconds. If it does not filcish within this time, 
it is moved to the tail of queue 1. If queue 0 is empty, the process at the head 
of queue 1 is given a quantum of 16 milliseconds. If it does not complete, it is 
preempted and is put into queue 2. Processes in queue 2 are run on an FCFS 
basis but are run only when queues 0 and 1 are empty. 
This scheduling algorithm gives highest priority to any process with a CPU 
burst of 8 milliseconds or less. Such a process will quickly get the CPU, finish 
its CPU burst, and go off to its next I/0 burst. Processes that need more than 
8 but less than 24 milliseconds are also served quickly, although with lower 
priority than shorter processes. Long processes automatically sink to queue 
2 and are served in FCFS order with any CPU cycles left over from queues 0 
and 1. 
Figure 5.7 Multilevel feedback queues. 

5.4 
5.4 
199 
In general, a multilevel feedback queue scheduler is defined by the 
following parameters: 
The number of queues 
The scheduling algorithm for each queue 
The method used to determine when to upgrade a process to a higher-
priority queue 
The method used to determine when to demote a process to a lower-
priority queue 
The method used to determine which queue a process will enter when that 
process needs service 
The definition of a multilevel feedback queue scheduler makes it the most 
general CPU-scheduling algorithm. It can be configured to match a specific 
system under design. Unfortunately, it is also the most complex algorithm, 
since defining the best scheduler requires some means by which to select 
values for all the parameters. 
In Chapter 4, we introduced threads to the process model, distinguishing 
between user-level and kernel-level threads. On operating systems that support 
them, it is kernel-level threads-not processes-that are being scheduled by 
the operating system. User-level threads are managed by a thread library, 
and the kernel is unaware of them. To run on a CPU, user-level threads 
must ultimately be mapped to an associated kernel-level thread, although 
this mapping may be indirect and may use a lightweight process (LWP). In this 
section, we explore scheduling issues involving user-level and kernel-level 
threads and offer specific examples of scheduling for Pthreads. 
5.4.1 
Contention Scope 
One distinction between user-level and kernel-level threads lies in how they 
are scheduled. On systems implementing the many-to-one (Section 4.2.1) and 
many-to-many (Section 4.2.3) models, the thread library schedules user-level 
threads to run on an available LWP, a scheme known as process-contention 
scope (PCS), since competition for the CPU takes place among threads belonging 
to the same process. When we say the thread library schedules user threads onto 
available LWPs, we do not mean that the thread is actually running on a CPU; 
this would require the operating system to schedule the kernel thread onto 
a physical CPU. To decide which kernel thread to schedule onto a CPU, the 
kernel uses system-contention scope (SCS). Competition for the CPU with SCS 
scheduling takes place among all threads in the system. Systems usilcg the 
one-to-one model (Section 4.2.2), such as Windows XP, Solaris, and Linux, 
schedule threads using only SCS. 
Typically, PCS is done according to priority-the scheduler selects the 
runnable thread with the highest priority to run. User-level thread priorities 

200 
Chapter 5 
5.5 
are set by the programmer and are not adjusted by the thread library, although 
some thread libraries may allow the programmer to change the priority of 
a thread. It is important to note that PCS will typically preempt the thread 
currently running in favor of a higher-priority thread; however, there is no 
guarantee of time slicing (Section 5.3.4) among threads of equal priority. 
5.4.2 Pthread Scheduling 
We provided a sample POSTX Pthread program in Section 4.3.1, along with an 
introduction to thread creation with Pthreads. Now, we highlight the POSIX 
Pthread API that allows specifying either PCS or SCS during thread creation. 
Pthreads identifies the following contention scope values: 
PTHREAD_SCOPE_PROCESS schedules threads using PCS scheduling. 
PTHREAD_SCOPE_SYSTEM schedules threads using SCS scheduling. 
On 
systems 
implementing 
the 
many-to-many 
model, 
the 
PTHREAD_SCOPE_PROCESS policy schedules user-level threads onto available 
LWPs. The number of LWPs is maintained by the thread library, perhaps using 
scheduler activations (Section 4.4.6). The PTHREAD_SCOPE_SYSTEM scheduling 
policy will create and bind an LWP for each user-level thread on many-to-many 
systems, effectively mapping threads using the one-to-one policy. 
The Pthread IPC provides two functions for getting-and setting-the 
contention scope policy: 
pthread_attr_setscope(pthread_attr_t *attr, int scope) 
pthread_attr_getscope(pthread_attr_t *attr, int *scope) 
The first parameter for both functions contains a pointer to the attribute set for 
the thread. The second parameter for the pthread_attr_setscope () function 
is passed either the PTHREAD_SCOPE_SYSTEM or the PTHREAD_SCOPE_PROCESS 
value, indicating how the contention scope is to be set. In the case of 
pthread_attr_getscope (), this second parameter contaiilS a pointer to an 
int value that is set to the current value of the contention scope. If an error 
occurs, each of these functions returns a non-zero value. 
In Figure 5.8, we illustrate a Pthread scheduling API. The pro-
gram first determines the existing contention scope and sets it to 
PTHREAD_SCOPLPROCESS. It then creates five separate threads that will 
run using the SCS scheduling policy. Note that on some systems, only certain 
contention scope values are allowed. For example, Linux and Mac OS X 
systems allow only PTHREAD_SCOPE_SYSTEM. 
Our discussion thus far has focused on the problems of scheduling the CPU in 
a system with a single processor. If multiple CPUs are available, load sharing 
becomes possible; however, the scheduling problem becomes correspondingly 

505 
#include <pthreadoh> 
#include <stdiooh> 
#define NUM_THREADS 5 
int main(int argc, char *argv[]) 
{ 
} 
int i, scope; 
pthread_t tid[NUM_THREADS]; 
pthread_attr_t attr; 
I* get the default attributes *I 
pthread_attr_init(&attr); 
I* first inquire on the current scope *I 
if (pthread_attr_getscope(&attr, &scope) != 0) 
fprintf(stderr, "Unable to get scheduling scope\n"); 
else { 
} 
if (scope == PTHREAD_SCOPE_PROCESS) 
printf("PTHREAD_SCOPLPROCESS"); 
else if (scope == PTHREAD_SCOPE_SYSTEM) 
printf("PTHREAD_SCOPE_SYSTEM"); 
else 
fprintf(stderr, "Illegal scope valueo\n"); 
I* set the scheduling algorithm to PCS or SCS *I 
pthread_attr_setscope(&attr, PTHREAD_SCOPE_SYSTEM); 
I* create the threads *I 
for (i = 0; i < NUM_THREADS; i++) 
pthread_create(&tid[i] ,&attr,runner,NULL); 
I* now join on each thread *I 
for (i = 0; i < NUM_THREADS; i++) 
pthread_join(tid[i], NULL); 
I* Each thread will begin control in this function *I 
void *runner(void *param) 
{ 
I* do some work 0 0 0 *I 
pthread_exi t ( 0) ; 
} 
Figure 508 
Pthread scheduling API. 
201 
more complex. Many possibilities have been tried; and as we saw with single-
processor CPU scheduling, there is no one best solution. Here, we discuss 
several concerns in multiprocessor scheduling. We concentrate on systems 

202 
Chapter 5 
in which the processors are identical-homogeneous-in terms of their 
functionality; we can then use any available processor to run any process 
in the queue. (Note, however, that even with homogeneous multiprocessors, 
there are sometimes limitations on scheduling. Consider a system with an l/0 
device attached to a private bus of one processor. Processes that wish to use 
that device must be scheduled to run on that processor.) 
5.5.1 Approaches to Multiple-Processor Scheduling 
One approach to CPU scheduling in a n1.ultiprocessor system has all scheduling 
decisions, I/O processing, and other system activities handled by a single 
processor-the master server. The other processors execute only user code. 
This asymmetric multiprocessing is simple because only one processor 
accesses the system data structures, reducing the need for data sharing. 
A second approach uses symmetric multiprocessing (SMP), where each 
processor is self-scheduling. All processes may be in a common ready queue, or 
each processor may have its own private queue of ready processes. Regardless, 
scheduling proceeds by having the scheduler for each processor examine the 
ready queue and select a process to execute. As we shall see in Chapter 61 
if we have multiple processors trying to access and update a common data 
structure, the scheduler must be programmed carefully. We must ensure that 
two processors do not choose the same process and that processes are not lost 
from the queue. Virtually all modern operating systems support SMP, including 
Windows XP, Windows 2000, Solaris, Linux, and Mac OS X. In the remainder of 
this section, we discuss issues concerning SMP systems. 
5.5.2 Processor Affinity 
Consider what happens to cache memory when a process has been running on 
a specific processor. The data most recently accessed by the process populate 
the cache for the processor; and as a result, successive memory accesses by 
the process are often satisfied in cache memory. Now consider what happens 
if the process migrates to another processor. The contents of cache memory 
must be invalidated for the first processor, and the cache for the second 
processor must be repopulated. Because of the high cost of invalidating and 
repopulating caches, most SMP systems try to avoid migration of processes 
from one processor to another and instead attempt to keep a process rumung 
on the same processor. This is known as processor affinity-that is, a process 
has an affinity for the processor on which it is currently rumting. 
Processor affinity takes several forms. When an operating system has a 
policy of attempting to keep a process running on the same processor-but 
not guaranteeing that it will do so-we have a situation known as soft affinity. 
Here, it is possible for a process to migrate between processors. Some systems 
-such as Lim.IX -also provide system calls that support hard affinity, thereby 
allowing a process to specify that it is not to migrate to other processors. Solaris 
allows processes to be assigned to 
limiting which processes can 
run on which CPUs. It also implements soft affinity. 
The main-memory architecture of a system can affect processor affinity 
issues. Figure 5.9 illustrates an architecture featuring non-uniform memory 
access (NUMA), in which a CPU has faster access to some parts of main memory 
than to other parts. Typically, this occurs in systems containing combined CPU 

5.5 
203 
computer 
Figure 5.9 NUMA and CPU scheduling. 
and memory boards. The CPUs on a board can access the memory on that board 
with less delay than they can access memory on other boards in the system. 
If the operating system's CPU scheduler and memory-placement algorithms 
work together, then a process that is assigned affinity to a particular CPU 
can be allocated memory on the board where that CPU resides. This example 
also shows that operating systems are frequently not as cleanly defined and 
implemented as described in operating-system textbooks. Rather, the "solid 
lines" between sections of an operating system are frequently only "dotted 
lines," with algorithms creating connections in ways aimed at optimizing 
performance and reliability. 
5.5.3 Load Balancing 
On SMP systems, it is important to keep the workload balanced among all 
processors to fully utilize the benefits of having more than one processor. 
Otherwise, one or more processors may sit idle while other processors have 
high workloads, along with lists of processes awaiting the CPU. Load balancing 
attempts to keep the workload evenly distributed across all processors in 
an SMP system. It is important to note that load balancing is typically only 
necessary on systems where each processor has its own private queue of eligible 
processes to execute. On systems with a common run queue, load balancing 
is often unnecessary, because once a processor becomes idle, it immediately 
extracts a rmmable process from the common run queue. It is also important to 
note, howeve1~ that in most contemporary operating systems supporting SMP, 
each processor does have a private queue of eligible processes. 
There are two general approaches to load balancing: push migration and 
pull migration. With push migration, a specific task periodically checks the 
load on each processor and -if it finds an imbalance-evenly distributes the 
load by moving (or pushing) processes from overloaded to idle or less-busy 
processors. Pull migration occurs when an idle processor pulls a waiting task 
from a busy processor. Push and pull migration need not be mutually exclusive 
and are in fact often implemented in parallel on load-balancing systems. For 
example, the Linux scheduler (described in Section 5.6.3) and the ULE scheduler 

204 
Chapter 5 
available for FreeBSD systems implement both techniqL1es. Linux runs its load-
balancing algorithm every 200 milliseconds (push migration) or whenever the 
run queue for a processor is empty (pull migration). 
Interestingly, load balancing often counteracts the benefits of processor 
affinity, discussed in Section 5.5.2. That is, the benefit of keeping a process 
running on the same processor is that the process can take advantage of its data 
being in that processor's cache memory. Either pulling or pushing a process 
from one processor to another invalidates this benefit. As is often the case 
in systems engineering, there is no absolute rule concerning what policy is 
best. Thus, in some systems, an idle processor always pulls a process from 
a non-idle processor; and in other systems, processes are moved only if the 
imbalance exceeds a certain threshold. 
5.5.4 Multicore Processors 
Traditionally, SMP systems have allowed several threads to run concurrently by 
providing multiple physical processors. However, a recent trend in computer 
hardware has been to place multiple processor cores on the same physical chip, 
resulting in a 
. Each core has a register set to maintain its 
architectural state and 
appears to the operating system to be a separate 
physical processor. SMP systems that use multicore processors are faster and 
consume less power than systems in which each processor has its own physical 
chip. 
Multicore processors may complicate scheduling issues. Let's consider how 
this can happen. Researchers have discovered that when a processor accesses 
memory, it spends a significant amount of time waiting for the data to become 
available. This situation, known as a 
may occur for various 
reasons, such as a cache miss (accessing data that is not in cache memory). 
Figure 5.10 illustrates a memory stall. In this scenario, the processor can spend 
up to 50 percent of its time waiting for data to become available from memory. 
To remedy this situation, many recent hardware designs have implemented 
multithreaded processor cores in which two (or more) hardware threads are 
assigned to each core. That way, if one thread stalls while waiting for memory, 
the core can switch to another thread. Figure 5.11 illustrates a dual-threaded 
processor core on which the execution of thread 0 and the execution of thread 1 
are interleaved. From an operating-system perspective, each hardware thread 
appears as a logical processor that is available to run a software thread. Thus, 
on a dual-threaded, dual-core system, four logical processors are presented to 
the operating system. The UltraSPARC Tl CPU has eight cores per chip and four 
0 
compute cycle 
~memory 
stall cycle 
thread 
c 
M 
c 
M 
c 
M 
c 
M 
time 
Figure 5.10 Memory stall. 

5.5 
205 
thread1 
c 
M 
c 
M 
c 
M 
c 
thread0 
c 
M 
c 
M 
c 
M 
c 
time 
Figure 5.11 
Multithreaded multicore system. 
hardware threads per core; from the perspective of the operating system, there 
appear to be 32 logical processors. 
In general, there are two ways to multithread a processor: ~__u.,u."·c-).;u:•cHccu 
multithreading. With coarse-grained multithreading, a thread 
executes on a processor until a long-latency event such as a memory stall occurs. 
Because of the delay caused by the long-latency event, the processor must 
switch to another thread to begin execution. However, the cost of switching 
between threads is high, as the instruction pipeline must be flushed before 
the other thread can begin execution on the processor core. Once this new 
thread begins execution, it begins filling the pipeline with its instructions. 
Fine-grained (or interleaved) multithreading switches between threads at a 
much finer level of granularity-typically at the boundary of an instruction 
cycle. However, the architectural design of fine-grained systems includes logic 
for thread switching. As a result, the cost of switching between threads is small. 
Notice that a multithreaded multicore processor actually requires two 
different levels of scheduling. On one level are the scheduling decisions that 
must be made by the operating system as it chooses which software thread to 
run on each hardware thread (logical processor). For this level of scheduling, 
the operating system may choose any scheduling algorithm, such as those 
described in Section 5.3. A second level of scheduling specifies how each core 
decides which hardware thread to run. There are several strategies to adopt 
in this situation. The UltraSPARC Tl, mentioned earlier, uses a simple round-
robin algorithm to schedule the four hardware threads to each core. Another 
example, the Intel Itanium, is a dual-core processor with hvo hardware-
managed threads per core. Assigned to each hardware thread is a dynamic 
urgency value ranging from 0 to 7, with 0 representing the lowest urgency, 
and 7 the highest. The Itanium. identifies five different events that may trigger 
a thread switch. When one of these events occurs, the thread-switching logic 
compares the urgency of the two threads and selects the thread with the highest 
urgency value to execute on the processor core. 
5.5.5 Virtualization and Scheduling 
A system with virtualization, even a single-CPU system, frequently acts like 
a multiprocessor system. The virtualization software presents one or more 
virtual CPUs to each of the virtual machines rum1.ing on the system and 
then schedules the use of the physical CPUs among the virtual machines. 
The significant variations between virtualization technologies make it difficult 
to summarize the effect of virtualization on scheduling (see Section 2.8). 
In general, though, most virtualized environments have one host operating 

206 
Chapter 5 
5.6 
system and many guest operating systems. The host operating system creates 
and manages the virtual machines, and each virtual n<achine has a guest 
operating system installed and applications running within that guest. Eacb 
guest operating system may be fine-tuned for specific use cases, applications, 
and users, including time sharing or even real-time operation. 
Any guest operating-system scheduling algorithm that assumes a certain 
amount of progress in a given amount of time will be negatively impacted by 
virtualization. Consider a time-sharing operating system that tries to allot 100 
milliseconds to each time slice to give users a reasonable response time. Within 
a virtual machine, this operating system is at the mercy of the virtualization 
system as to what CPU resources it actually receives. A given 100-millisecond 
time slice may take much more than 100 milliseconds of virtual CPU time. 
Depending on how busy the system is, the time slice may take a second or more, 
resulting in very poor response times for users logged into that virtual machine. 
The effect on a real-time operating system would be even more catastrophic. 
The net effect of such scheduling layering is that individual virtualized 
operating systems receive only a portion of the available CPU cycles, even 
though they believe they are receiving all of the cycles and indeed that they 
are scheduling all of those cycles. Commonly, the time-of-day clocks in virtual 
machines are incorrect because timers take longer to trigger than they would on 
dedicated CPUs. Virtualization can thus "Lmdo the good scheduling-algorithm 
efforts of the operating systems within virtual machines. 
We turn next to a description of the scheduling policies of the Solaris, Windows 
XP, and Linux operating systems. It is important to remember that we are 
describing the scheduling of kernel tlueads with Solaris and Windows XP. 
Recall that Linux does not distinguish between processes and threads; thus, 
we use the term task when discussing the Linux scheduler. 
5.6.1 
Example: Solaris Scheduling 
Solaris uses priority-based thread scheduling where each thread belongs to 
one of six classes: 
Time sharing (TS) 
Interactive (IA) 
Real time (RT) 
System (SYS) 
Fair share (FSS) 
Fixed priority (FP) 
Within each class there are different priorities and different scheduling algo-
rithms. 
The default scheduling class for a process is time sharing. The scheduling 
policy for the time-sharing class dynamically alters priorities and assigns time 
