10.1 
R 
For most users, the file system is the most visible aspect of an operating system. 
It provides the mechanism for on-line storage of and access to both data and 
programs of the operating system and all the users of the computer system. The 
file system consists of two distinct parts: a collection of files, each storing related 
data, and a directory structure, which organizes and provides information about 
all the files in the system. File systems live on devices, which we explore fully 
irl the following chapters but touch upon here. In this chapter, we consider 
the various aspects of files and the major directory structures. We also discuss 
the semantics of sharing files among multiple processes, users, and computers. 
Finally, we discuss ways to handle file protection, necessary when we have 
multiple users and we want to control who may access files and how files may 
be accessed. 
To explain the function of file systems. 
To describe the interfaces to file systems. 
To discuss file-system design tradeoffs, including access methods, file 
sharing, file locking, and directory structures. 
To explore file-system protection. 
Computers can store information on various storage media, such as magnetic 
disks, magnetic tapes, and optical disks. So that the computer system will 
be convenient to use, the operating system provides a uniform logical view 
of information storage. The operating system abstracts from the physical 
properties of its storage devices to define a logical storage unit, the file. Files are 
mapped by the operating system onto physical devices. These storage devices 
are usually nonvolatile, so the contents are persistent through power failures 
and system reboots. 
421 

422 
Chapter 10 
A file is a named collection of related information that is recorded on 
secondary storage. From a user's perspective, a file is the smallest allotment 
of logical secondary storage; that is, data cannot be written to secondary 
storage unless they are within a file. Commonly, files represent programs (both 
source and object forms) and data. Data files may be numeric, alphabetic, 
alphanumeric, or binary. Files may be free form, such as text files, or may be 
formatted rigidly. In general, a file is a sequence of bits, bytes, lines, or records, 
the meaning of which is defined by the file's creator and user. The concept of 
a file is thus extremely generaL 
The information in a file is defined by its creator. Many different types 
of information may be stored in a file-source programs, object programs, 
executable programs, numeric data, text, payroll records, graphic images, 
sound recordings, and so on. A file has a certain defined 
which 
depends on its type. A text file is a sequence of characters organized into 
lines (and possibly pages). A source file is a sequence of subroutines and 
functions, each of which is further organized as declarations followed by 
executable statements. An object file is a sequence of bytes organized in.to 
blocks nnderstandable by the system's linker. An executable file is a series of 
code sections that the loader can bring into memory and execute. 
10.1.1 
File Attributes 
A file is named, for the convenience of its human users, and is referred to by 
its name. A name is usually a string of characters, such as example.c. Some 
systems differentiate between uppercase and lowercase characters in names, 
whereas other systems do not. When a file is named, it becomes independent 
of the process, the user, and even the system that created it. For instance, one 
user might create the file example.c, and another user might edit that file by 
specifying its name. The file's owner might write the file to a floppy disk, send 
it in an e-mail, or copy it across a network, and it could still be called example.c 
on the destination system. 
A file's attributes vary from one operating system to another but typically 
consist of these: 
Name. The symbolic file name is the only information kept in human-
readable form. 
Identifier. This unique tag, usually a number, identifies the file within the 
file system; it is the non-human-readable name for the file. 
Type. This information is needed for systems that support different types 
of files. 
Location. This information is a pointer to a device and to the location of 
the file on that device. 
Size. The current size of the file (in bytes, words, or blocks) and possibly 
the maximum allowed size are included in this attribute. 
Protection. Access-control information determines who can do reading, 
writing, executing, and so on. 

10.1 
423 
Time, date, and user identification. This information may be kept for 
creation, last modification, and last use. These data can be useful for 
protection, security, and usage monitoring. 
The information about all files is kept in the directory structure, which also 
resides on secondary storage. Typically, a directory entry consists of the file's 
name and its unique identifier. The identifier in turn locates the other file 
attributes. It may take more than a kilobyte to record this information for 
each file. In a system with many files, the size of the directory itself may be 
megabytes. Because directories, like files, must be nonvolatile, they must be 
stored on the device and brought into memory piecemeal, as needed. 
10.1.2 File Operations 
A file is an 
To define a file properly, we need to consider the 
operations that can be performed on files. The operating system can provide 
system calls to create, write, read, reposition, delete, and truncate files. Let's 
examine what the operating system must do to perform each of these six basic 
file operations. It should then be easy to see how other similar operations, such 
as renaming a file, can be implemented. 
Creating a file. Two steps are necessary to create a file. First, space in the 
file system must be found for the file. We discuss how to allocate space for 
the file in Chapter 11. Second, an entry for the new file must be made in 
the directory. 
Writing a file. To write a file, we make a system call specifying both the 
name of the file and the information to be written to the file. Given the 
name of the file, the system searches the directory to find the file's location. 
The system must keep a write pointer to the location in the file where the 
next write is to take place. The write pointer must be updated whenever a 
write occurs. 
Reading a file. To read from a file, we use a system call that specifies the 
name of the file and where (in memory) the next block of the file should 
be put. Again, the directory is searched for the associated entry, and the 
system needs to keep a read pointer to the location in the file where the 
next read is to take place. Once the read has taken place, the read pointer 
is updated. Because a process is usually either reading from or writing to 
a file, the current operation location can be kept as a per-process 
. Both the read and write operations use this same 
pointer, saving space and reducing system complexity. 
Repositioning within a file. The directory is searched for the appropriate 
entry, and the current-file-position pointer is repositioned to a given value. 
Repositioning within a file need not involve any actual I/0. This file 
operation is also kn.own as a file seek. 
Deleting a file. To delete a file, we search the directory for the named file. 
Having found the associated directory entry, we release all file space, so 
that it can be reused by other files, and erase the directory entry. 

424 
Chapter 10 
Truncating a file. The user may want to erase the contents of a file but 
keep its attributes. Rather than forcing the user to delete the file and then 
recreate it, this function allows all attributes to remain unchanged -except 
for file length-but lets the file be reset to length zero and its file space 
released. 
These six basic operations comprise the minimal set of required file 
operations. Other common operations include appending new information 
to the end of an existing file and renaming an existing file. These primitive 
operations can then be combined to perform other file operations. For instance, 
we can create a copy of a file, or copy the file to another I/O device, such as 
a printer or a display, by creating a new file and then reading from the old 
and writing to the new. We also want to have operations that allow a user to 
get and set the various attributes of a file. For example, we may want to have 
operations that allow a user to determine the status of a file, such as the file's 
length, and to set file attributes, such as the file's owner. 
Most of the file operations mentioned involve searching the directory for 
the entry associated with the named file. To avoid this constant searching, many 
systems require that an open () system call be made before a file is first used 
actively. The operating system keeps a small table, called the 
containing information about all open files. When a file operation is requested, 
the file is specified via an index into this table, so no searching is required. 
When the file is no longer being actively used, it is closed by the process, and 
the operating system removes its entry from the open-file table. create and 
delete are system calls that work with closed rather than open files. 
Some systems implicitly open a file when the first reference to it is made. 
The file is automatically closed when the job or program that opened the 
file terminates. Most systems, however, require that the programmer open a 
file explicitly with the open() system call before that file can be used. The 
open() operation takes a file name and searches the directory, copying the 
directory entry into the open-file table. The open() call can also accept access-
mode information-create, read-only, read-write, append-only, and so on. 
This mode is checked against the file's permissions. If the request mode is 
allowed, the file is opened for the process. The open () system call typically 
returns a pointer to the entry in the open-file table. This pointer, not the actual 
file name, is used in all I/0 operations, avoiding any further searching and 
simplifying the system-call interface. 
The implementation of the open() and close() operations is more 
complicated in an environment where several processes may open the file 
simultaneously. This may occur in a system~ where several different applications 
open the same file at the same time. Typically, the operating system uses two 
levels of internal tables: a per-process table and a system-wide table. The per-
process table tracks all files that a process has open. Stored in this table is 
information regarding the use of the file by the process. For instance, the 
current file pointer for each file is found here. Access rights to the file and 
accounting information can also be included. 
Each entry in the per-process table in turn points to a system-wide open-file 
table. The system-wide table contains process-independent information, such 
as the location of the file on disk, access dates, and file size. Once a file has been 
opened by one process, the system-wide table includes an entry for the file. 

10.1 
425 
When another process executes an open() calt a new entry is simply added 
to the process's open-file table pointing to the appropriate entry in the system-
wide table. Typically, the open-file table also has an open count associated with 
each file to indicate how ncany processes have the file open. Each close() 
decreases this open count, and when the open count reaches zero, the file is no 
longer in use, and the file's entry is removed from the open-file table. 
In summary, several pieces of information are associated with an open file. 
File pointer. On systems that do not include a file offset as part of the 
read() and write() system calls, the systein must track the last read-
write location as a current-file-position pointer. This pointer is unique to 
each process operating on the file and therefore must be kept separate from 
the on-disk file attributes. 
File-open count. As files are closed, the operating system must reuse its 
open-file table entries, or it could run out of space in the table. Because 
multiple processes may have opened a file, the system must wait for the 
last file to close before removing the open-file table entry. The file-open 
counter tracks the number of opens and closes and reaches zero on the last 
close. The system can then remove the entry. 
Disk location of the file. Most file operations require the system to modify 
data within the file. The information needed to locate the file on disk is 
kept in memory so that the system does not have to read it from disk for 
each operation. 
Access rights. Each process opens a file in an access mode. This information 
is stored on the per-process table so the operating system can allow or deny 
subsequent I/0 requests. 
Some operating systems provide facilities for locking an open file (or 
sections of a file). File locks allow one process to lock a file and prevent other 
processes from gaining access to it. File locks are useful for files that are shared 
by several processes-for example, a system log file that can be accessed and 
modified by a number of processes in the system. 
FILE LOCKING IN JAVA 
In the Java. API, acquiring a. lock requires firstobtaini:ng the F:i..leChannel 
fbr thefile to be locked. The loc;k() method of the FileChannel is. used to 
acquir(o the lock. The API of the lock() ·method is 
FileLock lock{l.ong begin, long end, l;>ooleqn shared) 
where begin and end are the h:~gi1iningand ending positions of the region 
being locked. Settingshared to true isfb~ shared locks; setting shared 
to false acquires the lock exclusively. Tice lock is released by invoking the 
release () of the FileLock returned by the lock (} operati?n. 
The program in Figure 10.1 illusttates file locking in Java, This program 
acquires two locks on thefilefile .. txt>The first half of.the file is acquired as an 
exclusive lock~ the lock for the second half is a shared lock. 

426 
Chapter 10 
File locks provide functionality similar to reader-writer locks, covered in 
Section 6.6.2. A shared lock is akin to a reader lock in that several processes 
can acquire the lock concurrently. An exclusive lock behaves like a writer lock; 
only one process at a time can acquire such a lock. It is important to note 

10.1 
427 
that not aU operating systems provide both types of locks; some systems only 
provide exclusive file locking. 
Furthermore, operating systems may provide either mandatory or advi-
sory file-locking mechanisms. If a lock is n1.andatory, then once a process 
acquires an exclusive lock, the operating system will prevent any other process 
from accessing the locked file. For example, assume a process acquires an 
exclusive lock on the file system .log. If we attempt to open system .log 
from another process-for example, a text editor-the operating system will 
prevent access until the exclusive lock is released. This occurs even if the text 
editor is not written explicitly to acquire the lock. Alternatively, if the lock 
is advisory, then the operating system will not prevent the text editor from 
acquiring access to system .log. Rather, the text editor must be written so that 
it manually acquires the lock before accessing the file. In other words, if the 
locking scheme is mandatory, the operating system ensures locking integrity. 
For advisory locking, it is up to software developers to ensure that locks are 
appropriately acquired and released. As a general rule, Windows operating 
systems adopt mandatory locking, and UNIX systems employ advisory locks. 
The use of file locks requires the same precautions as ordinary process 
synchronization. For example, programmers developing on systems with 
mandatory locking must be careful to hold exclusive file locks only while 
they are accessing the file; otherwise, they will prevent other processes from 
accessing the file as well. Furthermore, some measures must be taken to ensure 
that two or more processes do not become involved in a deadlock while trying 
to acquire file locks. 
10.1.3 File Types 
When we design a file system-indeed, an entire operating system-we 
always consider whether the operating system should recognize and support 
file types. If an operating system recognizes the type of a file, it can then operate 
on the file in reasonable ways. For example, a common mistake occurs when a 
user tries to print the binary-object form of a program. This attempt normally 
produces garbage; however, the attempt can succeed if the operating system 
has been told that the file is a binary-object program. 
A common technique for implementing file types is to include the type as 
part of the file name. The name is split into two parts-a name and an extension, 
usually separated by a period character (Figure 10.2). In this way, the user and 
the operating system can tell from the name alone what the type of a file is. 
For example, most operating systems allow users to specify a file name as a 
sequence of characters followed by a period and terminated by an extension of 
additional characters. File name examples include resume.doc, Server.java, and 
ReaderThread. c. 
The system uses the extension to indicate the type of the file and the type 
of operations that can be done on that file. Only a file with a .com, .exe, or .bat 
extension can be executed, for instance. The .com and .exe files are two forms of 
binary executable files, whereas a .bat file is a 
containing, in ASCII 
format, commands to the operating system. MS-DOS recognizes only a few 
extensions, but application programs also use extensions to indicate file types 
in which they are interested. For example, assemblers expect source files to have 
an .asm extension, and the Microsoft Word word processor expects its files to 

428 
Chapter 10 
!}:iSnl~1:f'"-~·:,.·j\·. ir~i:tJI ~·· 
.~.: "''' r,~~:r:::~ ·;· ,'u:~rt~tt~~·~ .. ~\ 
•·· ... · ... ·.·••·. 
:'·'>·~··· :. 
':·:•c •·· 
executable 
exe, com, bin 
ready~to-run machine-
or none 
language program 
object 
obj, o 
compiled, machine 
language, not linked 
source code 
c, cc, java, pas, 
source code in various 
asm, a 
languages 
batch 
bat, sh 
commands to the command 
interpreter 
text 
txt, doc 
textual data, documents 
wo rdprocessor wp,tex, rtf, 
various wordcprocessor 
doc 
formats 
library 
lib, a, so, dll 
libraries o.troutines for 
.programmers 
print or view 
ps, pdf, jpg 
ASCII or binary file in a 
format for printing or 
viewing 
archive 
arc, zip, .tar 
1·· related files grouped into 
.one file,sometimes com-
pressed, for archiving 
or storage 
multimedia 
mpeg, mov, rm, 
binary file containing 
mp3, avi 
audio or A/V information 
Figure 10.2 Common file types. 
end with a .doc extension. These extensions are not required, so a user may 
specify a file without the extension (to save typing), and the application will 
look for a file with the given name and the extension it expects. Because these 
extensions are not supported by the operating system, they can be considered 
as "hints" to the applications that operate on them. 
Another example of the utility of file types comes from the TOPS-20 
operating system. If the user tries to execute an object program whose source file 
has been modified (or edited) since the object file was produced, the source file 
will be recompiled automatically. This function ensures that the user always 
runs an up-to-date object file. Otherwise, the user could waste a significant 
amount of time executing the old object file. For this function to be possible, 
the operating system must be able to discriminate the source file from the 
object file, to check the time that each file was created or last modified, and 
to determine the language of the source program (in order to use the correct 
compiler). 
Consider, too, the Mac OS X operating system. In this system, each file has 
a type, such as TEXT (for text file) or APPL (for application). Each file also has 
a creator attribute containing the name of the program that created it. This 
attribute is set by the operating system during the create() call, so its use 
is enforced and supported by the system. For instance, a file produced by a 
word processor has the word processor's name as its creator. When the user 
opens that file, by double-clicking the mouse on the icon representing the file, 

10.1 
429 
the word processor is invoked automatically, and the file is loaded, ready to be 
edited. 
The UNIX system uses a crude 
stored at the beginning of 
some files to indicate roughly the type of the file-executable program, batch 
file (or 
PostScript file, and so on. Not all files have magic numbers, 
so system features cannot be based solely on this information. UNIX does not 
record the name of the creating program, either. UNIX does allow file-name-
extension hints, but these extensions are neither enforced nor depended on by 
the operating system; they are meant mostly to aid users in determining what 
type of contents the file contains. Extensions can be used or ignored by a given 
application, but that is up to the application's programmer. 
10.1.4 File Structure 
File types also can be used to indicate the internal structure of the file. As 
mentioned in Section 10.1.3, source and object files have structures that match 
the expectations of the programs that read them. Further, certain files must 
conform to a required structure that is understood by the operating system. For 
example, the operating system requires that an executable file have a specific 
structure so that it can determine where in memory to load the file and what 
the location of the first instruction is. Some operating systems extend this idea 
into a set of system-supported file structures, with sets of special operations 
for manipulating files with those structures. For instance, DEC's VMS operating 
system has a file system that supports three defined file structures. 
This point brings us to one of the disadvantages of having the operating 
system support multiple file structures: the resulting size of the operating 
system is cumbersome. If the operating system defines five different file 
structures, it needs to contain the code to support these file structures. 
In addition, it may be necessary to define every file as one of the file 
types supported by the operating system. When new applications require 
information structured in ways not supported by the operating system, severe 
problems may result. 
For example, assume that a system supports two types of files: text files 
(composed of ASCII characters separated by a carriage return and line feed) 
and executable binary files. Now, if we (as users) want to define an encrypted 
file to protect the contents from being read by unauthorized people, we may 
find neither file type to be appropriate. The encrypted file is not ASCII text lines 
but rather is (apparently) random bits. Although it may appear to be a binary 
file, it is not executable. As a result, we may have to circumvent or misuse the 
operating system's file-type mechanism or abandon our encryption scheme. 
Some operating systems impose (and support) a minimal number of file 
structures. This approach has been adopted in UNIX, MS-DOS, and others. UN1X 
considers each file to be a sequence of 8-bit bytes; no interpretation of these bits 
is made by the operating systen'l. This scheme provides maximum flexibility 
but little support. Each application program must include its own code to 
interpret an input file as to the appropriate structure. However, all operating 
systems must support at least one structure-that of an executable file-so 
that the system is able to load and run programs. 
The Macintosh operating system also supports a minimal number of 
file structures. It expects files to contain two parts: a 
and a 

430 
Chapter 10 
10.2 
The resource fork contains information of interest to the user. 
For instance, it holds the labels of any buttons displayed by the program. 
A foreign user may want to re-label these buttons in his own language, and 
the Macintosh operating system provides tools to allow modification of the 
data in the resource fork. The data fork contains program code or data-the 
traditional file contents. To accomplish the same task on a UNIX or MS-DOS 
system, the programmer would need to change and recompile the source code, 
unless she created her own user-changeable data file. Clearly, it is useful for 
an operating system to support structures that will be used frequently and 
that will save the programmer substantial effort. Too few structures make 
programming inconvenient, whereas too many cause operating-system bloat 
and programmer confusion. 
10.1.5 Internal File Structure 
Internally, locating an offset within a file can be complicated for the operating 
system. Disk systems typically have a well-defined block size determined by 
the size of a sector. All disk I/0 is performed in units of one block (physical 
record), and all blocks are the same size. It is unlikely that the physical record 
size will exactly match the length of the desired logical record. Logical records 
may even vary in length. Paddng a number of logical records into physical 
blocks is a common solution to this problem. 
For example, the UNIX operating system defines all files to be simply 
streams of bytes. Each byte is individually addressable by its offset from the 
begi1ming (or end) of the file. In this case, the logical record size is 1 byte. The 
file system automatically packs and unpacks bytes into physical disk blocks-
say, 512 bytes per block-as necessary. 
The logical record size, physical block size, and packing technique deter-
mine how many logical records are in each physical block. The packing can be 
done either by the user's application program or by the operating system. In 
either case, the file may be considered a sequence of blocks. All the basic I/O 
functions operate in terms of blocks. The conversion from logical records to 
physical blocks is a relatively simple software problem. 
Because disk space is always allocated in blocks, some portion of the last 
block of each file is generally wasted. If each block were 512 bytes, for example, 
then a file of 1,949 bytes would be allocated four blocks (2,048 bytes); the last 
99 bytes would be wasted. The waste incurred to keep everything in units 
of blocks (instead of bytes) is 
All file systems suffer 
from internal fragmentation; the larger the block size, the greater the internal 
fragmentation. 
Files store information. When it is used, this information must be accessed and 
read into computer memory. The information in the file can be accessed in 
several ways. Some systems provide only one access method for files. Other 
systems, such as those of IBM, support many access methods, and choosing the 
right one for a particular application is a major design problem. 

10.2 
431 
beginning 
current position 
end 
<];:::::,,,===, rewind~ 
read or write~ 
Figure 10.3 Sequential-access file. 
10.2.1 Sequential Access 
The simplest access method is 
. Information in the file is 
processed in order, one record after the other. This mode of access is by far the 
most common; for example, editors and compilers usually access files in this 
fashion. 
Reads and writes make up the bulk of the operations on a file. A read 
operation-read next-reads the next portion of the file and automatically 
advances a file pointer, which tracks the I/O location. Similarly, the write 
operation-write next-appends to the end of the file and advances to the 
end of the newly written material (the new end of file). Such a file can be reset 
to the beginning; and on some systems, a program may be able to skip forward 
or backward n records for some integer n-perhaps only for n = 1. Sequential 
access, which is depicted in Figure 10.3, is based on a tape model of a file and 
works as well on sequential-access devices as it does on random-access ones. 
10.2.2 Direct Access 
(or 
A file is made up of fixed-
length 
that allow programs to read and write records rapidly 
in no particular order. The direct-access method is based on a disk model of 
a file, since disks allow random access to any file block. For direct access, the 
file is viewed as a numbered sequence of blocks or records. Thus, we may read 
block 14, then read block 53, and then write block 7. There are no restrictions 
on the order of reading or writing for a direct-access file. 
Direct-access files are of great use for immediate access to large amounts 
of information. Databases are often of this type. When a query concerning a 
particular subject arrives, we compute which block contains the answer and 
then read that block directly to provide the desired information. 
As a simple example, on an airline-reservation system, we might store all 
the information about a particular flight (for example, flight 713) in the block 
identified by the flight number. Thus, the number of available seats for flight 
713 is stored in block 713 of the reservation file. To store il1formation about a 
larger set such as people, we might compute a hash function on the people's 
names or search a small in-ncemory index to determine a block to read and 
search. 
For the direct-access method, the file operations must be modified to 
include the block number as a parameter. Thus, we have read n, where n is 
the block number, rather than read next, and ·write n rather than write next. An 
alternative approach is to retain read next and write next, as with sequential 

432 
Chapter 10 
Figure 10.4 Simulation of sequential access on a direct-access file. 
access, and to add an operation position file to n, where n is the block number. 
Then, to effect a read n, we would position to n and then read next. 
The block number 
by the user to the operating system is normally 
a 
A relative block number is an index relative to the 
begirm.ing of the file. Thus, the first relative block of the file is 0, the next is 
1, and so on, even though the absolute disk address may be 14703 for the 
first block and 3192 for the second. The use of relative block numbers allows 
the operating system to decide where the file should be placed (called the 
allocation problem, as discussed in Chapter 11) and helps to prevent the user 
from accessing portions of the file system that may not be part of her file. Some 
systems start their relative block numbers at 0; others start at 1. 
How, then, does the system satisfy a request for record Nina file? Assuming 
we have a logical record length L, the request for record N is turned into an I/0 
request for L bytes starting at location L * (N) within the file (assuming the first 
record is N = 0). Since logical records are of a fixed size, it is also easy to read, 
write, or delete a record. 
Not all operating systems support both sequential and direct access for 
files. Some systems allow only sequential file access; others allow only direct 
access. Some systems require that a file be defined as sequential or direct when 
it is created; such a file can be accessed only in a manner consistent with its 
declaration. We can easily simulate sequential access on a direct-access file by 
simply keeping a variable cp that defines our current position, as shown in 
Figure 10.4. Simulating a direct-access file on a sequential-access file, however, 
is extremely inefficient and clumsy. 
10.2.3 Other Access Methods 
Other access methods can be built on top of a direct-access method. These 
methods generally involve the construction of an index for the file. The 
like an index in the back of a 
contains pointers to the various blocks. To 
find a record in the file, we first search the index and then use the 
to 
access the file directly and to find the desired record. 
For example, a retail-price file might list the universal 
codes (UPCs) 
items, with the associated prices. Each record consists 
a 10-digit UPC and 
a 6-digit price, 
a 16-byte record. If our disk has 1,024 bytes per 
we 
can store 64 records per block. A file of 120,000 records would occupy about 
2,000 blocks (2 million bytes). By keeping the file sorted by UPC, we can define 
an index consisting of the first UPC in each block. This index would have 
entries of 10 digits each, or 20,000 bytes, and thus could be kept in memory. To 

10.3 
10.3 
433 
logical record 
last name 
number 
Adams 
Arthur 
Asher 
• 
sm!th,jol:iR!social~security[ age 
. 
/ 
• 
e 
..... smith ·· 
.'. 
'<:/ 
index file 
relative file 
Figure 10.5 Example of iRdex and relative files. 
find the price of a particular item, we can make a binary search of the index. 
From this search, we learn exactly which block contains the desired record and 
access that block. This structure allows us to search a large file doing little I/0. 
With large files, the index file itself may become too large to be kept in 
memory. One solution is to create an index for the index file. The primary 
index file would contain pointers to secondary index files, which would point 
to the actual data items. 
For example, IBM's indexed sequential-access method (ISAM) uses a small 
master index that points to disk blocks of a secondary index. The secondary 
index blocks point to the actual file blocks. The file is kept sorted on a defined 
key. To find a particular item, we first make a binary search of the master index, 
which provides the block number of the secondary index. This block is read 
in, and again a binary search is used to find the block containing the desired 
record. Finally, this block is searched sequentially. In this way, any record can 
be located from its key by at most two direct-access reads. Figure 10.5 shows a 
similar situation as implemented by VMS index and relative files. 
Next, we consider how to store files. Certainly, no general-purpose computer 
stores just one file. There are typically thousand, millions, and even billions 
of files within a computer. Files are stored on random-access storage devices, 
including hard disks, optical disks, and solid state (memory-based) disks. 
A storage device can be used in its entirety for a file system. It can also be 
subdivided for finer-grained control. For example, a disk can be 
into quarters, and each quarter can hold a file system. Storage devices can also 
be collected together into RAID sets that provide protection from the failure of 
a single disk (as described in Section 12.7). Sometimes, disks are subdivided 
and also collected into RAID sets. 
Partitioning is useful for limiting the sizes of individual file systems, 
putting multiple file-system types on the same device, or leaving part of the 
device available for other uses, such as swap space or unformatted (rz;c:.v) disk 

434 
Chapter 10 
directory 
. directory 
partition A 
files 
disk 2 
1-7--~~···~ 
disk 1 
directory 
partition C 
files 
partition B 
files 
disk 3 
Figure 10.6 A typical file-system organization. 
space. Partitions are also known as 
or (in the IBM world) 
A file 
system can be created on each of these parts of the disk. Any entity containing 
a file system is generally known as a 
The volume may be a subset 
of a device, a whole device, or multiple devices linked together into a RAID 
set. Each volume can be thought of as a virtual disk. Volumes can also store 
multiple operating systems, allowing a system to boot and run more than one 
operating system. 
Each volume that contains a file system must also contain information 
about the files in the system. This information is kept in entries in a 
or 
~ 
The device directory (more commonly 
known simply as that 
records information -such as name, location, 
size, and type-for all files on that volume. Figure 10.6 shows a typical 
file-system organization. 
10.3.1 Storage Structure 
As we have just seen, a general-purpose computer system has multiple storage 
devices, and those devices can be sliced up into volumes that hold file systems. 
Computer systems may have zero or more file systems, and the file systems 
may be of varying types. For example, a typical Solaris system may have dozens 
of file systems of a dozen different types, as shown in the file system list in 
Fig1-1re 10.7. 
In this book, we consider only general-purpose file systems. It is worth 
noting, though, that there are many special-purpose file systems. Consider the 
types of file systems in the Solaris example mentioned above: 
tmpfs-a "temporary" file system. that is created in volatile main memory 
and has its contents erased if the system reboots or crashes 
objfs-a "virtual" file system (essentially an interface to the kernel that 
looks like a file system) that gives debuggers access to kernel symbols 
dfs-a virtual file system that maintains "contract" information to manage 
which processes start when the system boots and must continue to run 
during operation 

10.3 
435 
I 
ufs 
/devices 
devfs 
/dev 
dev 
I system/ contract 
ctfs 
/proc 
proc 
/etc/mnttab 
mntfs 
I etc/ svc/volatile 
tmpfs 
I system/ object 
objfs 
/lib /libc.so.l 
lofs 
/dev/fd 
fd 
/var 
ufs 
/tmp 
tmpfs 
/var/run 
tmpfs 
/opt 
ufs 
/zpbge 
zfs 
I zpbge/backup 
zfs 
I export/home 
zfs 
/var/mail 
zfs 
/var/spool/Inqueue 
zfs 
/zpbg 
zfs 
/zpbg/zones 
zfs 
Figure 10.7 Solaris File System. 
lofs-a "loop back" file system that allows one file system to be accessed 
in place of another one 
prods-a virtual file system that presents information on all processes as 
a file system 
ufs, zfs-general-purpose file systems 
The file systems of computers, then, can be extensive. Even within a file 
system, it is useful to segregate files into groups and manage and act on those 
groups. This organization involves the use of directories. In the remainder of 
this section, we explore the topic of directory structure. 
10.3.2 Directory Overview 
The directory can be viewed as a symbol table that translates file names into 
their directory entries. If we take such a view, we see that the directory itself 
can be organized in many ways. We want to be able to insert entries, to delete 
entries, to search for a named entry, and to list all the entries in the directory. 
In this section, we examine several schemes for defining the logical structure 
of the directory system. 
When considering a particular directory structure, we need to keep in mind 
the operations that are to be performed on a directory: 
Search for a file. We need to be able to search a directory structure to find 
the entry for a particular file. Since files have symbolic names, and similar 

436 
Chapter 10 
names may indicate a relationship between files, we may want to be able 
to find all files whose names match a particular pattern. 
Create a file. New files need to be created and added to the directory. 
Delete a file. When a file is no longer needed, we want to be able to remove 
it from the directory. 
List a directory. We need to be able to list the files in a directory and the 
contents of the directory entry for each file in the list. 
Rename a file. Because the name of a file represents its contents to its users, 
we must be able to change the name when the contents or use of the file 
changes. Renaming a file may also allow its position within the directory 
structure to be changed. 
Traverse the file system. We may wish to access every directory and every 
file within a directory structure. For reliability, it is a good idea to save the 
contents and structure of the entire file system at regular intervals. Often, 
we do this by copyin.g all files to magn.etic tape. This technique provides a 
backup copy in case of system failure. In addition, if a file is no longer in 
use, the file can be copied to tape and the disk space of that file released 
for reuse by another file. 
In. the following sections, we describe the most common schemes for defining 
the logical structure of a directory. 
10.3.3 Single-level Directory 
The simplest directory structure is the single-level directory. All files are 
contained in the same directory, which is easy to support and understand 
(Figure 10.8). 
A single-level directory has significant limitations, however, when the 
number of files increases or when the system has more than one user. Since all 
files are in the same directory, they must have unique names. If two users call 
their data file test, then the unique-name rule is violated. For example, in one 
programming class, 23 students called the program for their second assignment 
prog2; another 11 called it assign2. Although file names are generally selected to 
reflect the content of the file, they are often limited in length, complicating the 
task of making file names unique. The MS-DOS operating system allows only 
11-character file names; UNIX, in contrast, allows 255 characters. 
Even a single user on a single-level directory may find it difficult to 
remember the names of all the files as the number of files increases. It is not 
directory 
files 
Figure 10.8 Single-level directory. 

10.3 
437 
uncommon for a user to have hundreds of files on one computer system and an 
equal number of additional files on another system. Keeping track of so many 
files is a daunting task. 
10.3.4 Two-Level Directory 
As we have seen, a single-level directory often leads to confusion of file names 
among different users. The standard solution is to create a separate directory 
for each user. 
In the two-level directory structure, each user has his own 
The UFDs have similar structures, but each lists only the files 
of a single user. W11en a user job starts or a user logs in, the system's 
is searched. The MFD is indexed by user name or account 
number, and each entry points to the UFD for that user (Figure 10.9). 
When a user refers to a particular file, only his own UFD is searched. Thus, 
different users may have files with the same name, as long as all the file names 
within each UFD are unique. To create a file for a user, the operating system 
searches only that user's UFD to ascertain whether another file of that name 
exists. To delete a file, the operating system confines its search to the local UFD; 
thus, it cannot accidentally delete another user's file that has the same name. 
The user directories themselves must be created and deleted as necessary. 
A special system program is run with the appropriate user name and account 
information. The program creates a new UFD and adds an entry for it to the MFD. 
The execution of this program might be restricted to system administrators. The 
allocation of disk space for user directories can be handled with the teduciques 
discussed in Chapter 11 for files themselves. 
Although the two-level directory structure solves the name-collision prob-
lem, it still has disadvantages. This structure effectively isolates one user from 
another. Isolation is an advantage when the users are completely independent 
but is a disadvantage when the users want to cooperate on some task and to 
access one another's files. Some systems simply do not allow local user files to 
be accessed by other users. 
If access is to be pennitted, one user must have the ability to name a file 
in another user's directory. To name a particular file "Lmiquely in a two-level 
directory, we must give both the user name and the file name. A two-level 
directory can be thought of as a tree, or an inverted tree, of height 2. The root 
of the tree is the MFD. Its direct descendants are the UFDs. The descendants of 
user file 
directory 
Figure i 0.9 Two-level directory structure. 

438 
Chapter 10 
the UFDs are the files themselves. The files are the leaves of the tree. Specifying 
a user name and a file name defines a path in the tree from the root (the MFD) 
to a leaf (the specified file). Thus, a user name and a file name define a path 
name. Every file in the system has a path name. To name a file uniquely, a user 
must know the path name of the file desired. 
For example, if user A wishes to access her own test file named test, she can 
simply refer to test. To access the file named test of user B (with directory-entry 
name userb), however, she might have to refer to /userb/test. Every system has 
its own syntax for naming files in directories other than the user's own. 
Additional syntax is needed to specify the volume of a file. For instance, 
in MS-DOS a volume is specified by a letter followed by a colon. Thus, a file 
specification might be C:\userb\fest. Some systems go even further and separate 
the volume, directory name, and file name parts of the specification. For 
instance, in VMS, the file login.com might be specified as: u:[sst.jdeck]login.com;l, 
where u is the name of the volume, sst is the name of the directory, jdeck is the 
name of the subdirectory, and 1 is the version number. Other systems simply 
treat the volume name as part of the directory name. The first name given is 
that of the volume, and the rest is the directory and file. For instance, /u/pbg/test 
might specify volume u, directory pbg, and file test. 
A special case of this situation occurs with the system files. Programs pro-
vided as part of the system -loaders, assemblers, compilers, utility routines, 
libraries, and so on-are generally defined as files. When the appropriate 
commands are given to the operating system, these files are read by the loader 
and executed. Many command interpreters simply treat such a command as the 
name of a file to load and execute. As the directory system is defined presently, 
this file name would be searched for in the current UFD. One solution would 
be to copy the system files into each UFD. However, copying all the system files 
would waste an enormous amount of space. (If the system files require 5 MB, 
then supporting 12 users would require 5 x 12 == 60 MB just for copies of the 
system files.) 
The standard solution is to complicate the search procedure slightly. A 
special user directory is defined to contain the system files (for example, user 
0). Whenever a file name is given to be loaded, the operating system first 
searches the local UFD. If the file is found, it is used. If it is not found, the system 
automatically searches the special user directory that contains the system files. 
The sequence of directories searched when a file is named is called the 
. The search path can be extended to contain an unlimited list of directories 
to search when a command name is given. This method is the one most used 
in UNIX and MS-DOS. Systems can also be designed so that each user has his 
own search path. 
10.3.5 Tree-Structured Directories 
Once we have seen how to view a two-level directory as a two-level tree, 
the natural generalization is to extend the directory structure to a tree of 
arbitrary height (Figure 10.10). This generalization allows users to create their 
own subdirectories and to organize their files accordingly. A tree is the most 
common directory structure. The tree has a root directory, and every file in the 
system has a unique path name. 

10.3 
439 
root 
ITITI 
0 0 
Figure i 0.10 Tree-structured directory structure. 
A directory (or subdirectory) contains a set of files or subdirectories. A 
directory is simply another file, but it is treated in a special way. All directories 
have the same internal format. One bit in each directory entry defines the entry 
as a file (0) or as a subdirectory (1). Special system calls are used to create and 
delete directories. 
In normal use, each process has a current directory. The 
should contain most of the files that are of current interest to the process. 
When reference is made to a file, the current directory is searched. If a file is 
needed that is not in the current directory, then the user usually must either 
specify a path name or change the current directory to be the directory holding 
that file. To change directories, a system call is provided that takes a directory 
name as a parameter and uses it to redefine the current directory. Thus, the 
user can change his current directory whenever he desires. From one change 
directory system call to the next, all open system calls search the current 
directory for the specified file. Note that the search path may or may not 
contain a special entry that stands for "the current directory." 
The initial current directory of the login shell of a user is designated when 
the user job starts or the user logs in. The operating system searches the 
accounting file (or some other predefined location) to find an entry for this 
user (for accounting purposes). In the accounting file is a pointer to (or the 
name of) the user's initial directory. This pointer is copied to a local variable 
for this user that specifies the user's initial current directory. From that shell, 
other processes can be spawned. The current directory of any subprocess is 
usually the current directory of the parent when it was spawned. 
Path names can be of two types: absolute and relative. An 
begins at the root and follows a 
down to the specified file, giving 
the directory names on the path. A 
defi11es a path from the 
current directory. For example, in the tree-structured file system of Figure 10.10, 

440 
Chapter 10 
if the current directory is root/spell/mail, then the relative path nan<e prt/jirst 
refers to the same file as does the absolute path name root/spell/mail/prt/jirst. 
Allowing a user to define her own subdirectories permits her to impose 
a structure on her files. This structure might result in separate directories for 
files associated with different topics (for example, a subdirectory was created 
to hold the text of this book) or different forms of information (for example, the 
directory programs may contain source programs; the directory bin may store 
all the binaries). 
An interesting policy decision in a tree-structured directory concerns how 
to handle the deletion of a directory. If a directory is empty, its entry in the 
directory that contains it can simply be deleted. However, suppose the directory 
to be deleted is not ernpty but contains several files or subdirectories. One of 
two approaches can be taken. Some systems, such as MS-DOS, will not delete a 
directory unless it is empty. Thus, to delete a directory, the user must first delete 
all the files in that directory. If any subdirectories exist this procedure must 
be applied recursively to them, so that they can be deleted also. This approach 
can result in a substantial amount of work. An alternative approach, such as 
that taken by the UNIX rm command, is to provide an option: when a request is 
made to delete a directory, all that directory's files and subdirectories are also 
to be deleted. Either approach is fairly easy to implement; the choice is one 
of policy. The latter policy is more convenient, but it is also more dangerous, 
because an entire directory structure can be removed with one command. If 
that command is issued in error, a large number of files and directories will 
need to be restored (assuming a backup exists). 
With a tree-structured directory system, users can be allowed to access, in 
addition to their files, the files of other users. For example, user B can access a 
file of user A by specifying its path names. User B can specify either an absolute 
or a relative path name. Alternatively, user B can change her current directory 
to be user A's directory and access the file by its file names. 
A path to a file in a tree-struch1red directory can be longer than a path 
in a two-level directory. To allow users to access programs without having to 
remember these long paths, the Macintosh operating system automates the 
search for executable programs. One method it uses is to maintain a file, called 
the Desktop File, containing the metadata code and the name and location 
of all executable programs it has seen. When a new hard disk is added to the 
system, or the network is accessed, the operating system traverses the directory 
structure, searching for executable programs on the device and recording the 
pertinent information. This mechanism supports the double-dick execution 
functionality described previously. A double-dick on a file causes its creator-
attribute data to be read and the Desktop File to be searched for a match. Once 
the match is found, the appropriate executable program is started with the 
clicked-on file as its input. 
10.3.6 Acyclic-Graph Directories 
Consider two programmers who are working on a joint project. The files asso-
ciated with that project can be stored in a subdirectory, separating them from 
other projects and files of the two programmers. But since both programmers 
are equally responsible for the project, both want the subdirectory to be in 

10.3 Directory and Disk Structure 
441 
Figure 10.11 
Acyclic-graph directory structure. 
their own directories. The common subdirectory should be shared. A shared 
directory or file will exist in the file system in two (or more) places at once. 
A tree structure prohibits the sharing of files or directories. An acyclic graph 
-that is, a graph with no cycles-allows directories to share subdirectories 
and files (Figure 10.11). The same file or subdirectory may be in two different 
directories. The acyclic graph is a natural generalization of the tree-structured 
directory scheme. 
It is important to note that a shared file (or directory) is not the same as two 
copies of the file. With two copies, each programmer can view the copy rather 
than the original, but if one programmer changes the file, the changes will not 
appear in the other's copy. With a shared file, only one actual file exists, so any 
changes made by one person are immediately visible to the other. Sharing is 
particularly important for subdirectories; a new file created by one person will 
automatically appear in all the shared subdirectories. 
When people are working as a team, all the files they want to share can be 
put into one directory. The UFD of each team member will contain this directory 
of shared files as a subdirectory. Even in the case of a single user, the user's file 
organization may require that some file be placed in different subdirectories. 
For example, a program written for a particular project should be both in the 
directory of all programs and in the directory for that project. 
Shared files and subdirectories can be implemented in several ways. A 
common way, exemplified by many of the UNIX systems, is to create a new 
directory entry called a link. A link is effectively a pointer to another file 
or subdirectory. For example, a link may be implemented as an absolute or a 
relative path name. When a reference to a file is made, we search the directory. If 
the directory entry is marked as a link, then the name of the real file is included 
in the link information. We resolve the link by using that path name to locate 
the real file. Links are easily identified by their format in the directory entry 
(or by having a special type on systems that support types) and are effectively 

442 
Chapter 10 
indirect pointers. The operating system ignores these links when traversing 
directory trees to preserve the acyclic structure of the system. 
Another common approach to implementing shared files is simply to 
duplicate all information about them in both sharing directories. Thus, both 
entries are identical and equal. Consider the difference between this approach 
and the creation of a link. The link is clearly different from the original directory 
entry; thus, the two are not equal. Duplicate directory entries, however, make 
the original and the copy indistinguishable. A major problem with duplicate 
directory entries is maintaining consistency when a file is modified. 
An acyclic-graph directory structure is more flexible than is a simple tree 
structure, but it is also more complex. Several problems must be considered 
carefully. A file may now have multiple absolute path names. Consequently, 
distinct file names may refer to the same file. This situation is similar to the 
aliasing problem for programming languages. If we are trying to traverse the 
entire file system-to find a file, to accumulate statistics on all files, or to copy 
all files to backup storage-this problem becomes significant, since we do not 
want to traverse shared structures more than once. 
Another problem involves deletion. When can the space allocated to a 
shared file be deallocated and reused? One possibility is to remove the file 
whenever anyone deletes it, but this action may leave dangling pointers to the 
now-nonexistent file. Worse, if the remaining file pointers contain actual disk 
addresses, and the space is subsequently reused for other files, these dangling 
pointers may point into the middle of other files. 
In a system where sharing is implemented by symbolic links, this situation 
is somewhat easier to handle. The deletion of a link need not affect the original 
file; only the link is removed. If the file entry itself is deleted, the space for 
the file is deallocated, leaving the links dangling. We can search for these links 
and remove them as well, but unless a list of the associated links is kept with 
each file, this search can be expensive. Alternatively, we can leave the links 
until an attempt is made to use them. At that time, we can determine that the 
file of the name given by the link does not exist and can fail to resolve the 
link name; the access is treated just as with any other illegal file name. (In this 
case, the system designer should consider carefully what to do when a file is 
deleted and another file of the same name is created, before a symbolic link to 
the original file is used.) In the case of UNIX, symbolic links are left when a file 
is deleted, and it is up to the user to realize that the orig:llcal file is gone or has 
been replaced. Microsoft Windows (all flavors) uses the same approach. 
Another approach to deletion is to preserve the file until all references to 
it are deleted. To implement this approach, we must have some mechanism 
for determining that the last reference to the file has been deleted. We could 
keep a list of all references to a file (directory entries or symbolic links). When 
a link or a copy of the directory entry is established, a new entry is added to 
the file-reference list. When a link or directory entry is deleted, we remove its 
entry on the list. The file is deleted when its file-reference list is empty. 
The trouble with this approach is the variable and potentially large size of 
the file-reference list. However, we really do not need to keep the entire list 
-we need to keep only a count of the number of references. Adding a new 
link or directory entry increments the reference count; deleting a link or entry 
decrements the count. When the count is 0, the file can be deleted; there are 
no remaining references to it. The UNIX operating system uses this approach 

10.3 
443 
for nonsymbolic links (or 
keeping a reference count in the file 
information block (or inode; see Appendix A.7.2). By effectively prohibiting 
multiple references to directories, we maintain an acyclic-graph structure. 
To avoid problems such as the ones just discussed, some systems do 
not allow shared directories or links. For example, in MS-DOS, the directory 
structure is a tree structure rather than an acyclic graph. 
10.3.7 General Graph Directory 
A serious problem with using an acyclic-graph structure is ensuring that there 
are no cycles. If we start with a two-level directory and allow users to create 
subdirectories, a tree-structured directory results. It should be fairly easy to see 
that simply adding new files and subdirectories to an existing tree-structured 
directory preserves the tree-structured nature. Howeve1~ when we add links, 
the tree structure is destroyed, resulting in a simple graph structure (Figure 
10.12). 
The primary advantage of an acyclic graph is the relative simplicity of the 
algorithms to traverse the graph and to determine when there are no more 
references to a file. We want to avoid traversing shared sections of an acyclic 
graph twice, mainly for performance reasons. If we have just searched a major 
shared subdirectory for a particular file without finding it, we want to avoid 
searching that subdirectory again; the second search would be a waste of time. 
If cycles are allowed to exist in the directory, we likewise want to 
avoid searching any component twice, for reasons of correctness as well as 
performance. A poorly designed algorithm might result in an infinite loop 
continually searching through the cycle and never terminating. One solution 
is to limit arbitrarily the number of directories that will be accessed during a 
search. 
A similar problem exists when we are trying to determine when a file 
can be deleted. With acyclic-graph directory structures, a value of 0 in the 
reference count means that there are no more references to the file or directory, 
Figure 10.12 General graph directory. 

444 
Chapter 10 
10.4 
and the file can be deleted. However, when cycles exist, the reference count 
may not be 0 even when it is no longer possible to refer to a directory or file. 
This anomaly results from the possibility of self-referencing (or a cycle) in the 
directory structure. In this case, we generally need to use a garbage-collection 
scheme to determine when the last reference has been deleted and the disk 
space can be reallocated. Garbage collection involves traversing the entire file 
system, marking everything that can be accessed. Then, a second pass collects 
everything that is not marked onto a list of free space. (A similar marking 
procedure can be used to ensure that a traversal or search will cover everything 
in the file system once and only once.) Garbage collection for a disk-based file 
system, however, is extremely time consuming and is thus seldom attempted. 
Garbage collection is necessary only because of possible cycles in the graph. 
Thus, an acyclic-graph structure is much easier to work with. The difficulty 
is to avoid cycles as new links are added to the structure. How do we know 
when a new lir1k will complete a cycle? There are algorithms to detect cycles 
in graphs; however, they are computationally expensive, especially when the 
graph is on disk storage. A simpler algorithm in the special case of directories 
and links is to bypass links during directory traversal. Cycles are avoided, and 
no extra overhead is incurred. 
Just as a file must be opened before it is used, a file system must be mounted before 
it can be available to processes on the system. More specifically, the directory 
structure may be built out of multiple volumes, which must be mounted to 
make them available within the file-system name space. 
The mount procedure is straightforward. The operating system is given the 
name of the device and the 
location within the file structure 
where the file system is to be attached. Some operating systems require that a 
file system type be provided, while others inspect the structures of the device 
and determine the type of file system. Typically, a mount point is an empty 
directory. For instance, on a UNIX system, a file system containing a user's home 
directories might be mounted as /home; then, to access the directory structure 
within that file system, we could precede the directory names with /home, as 
in /home/jane. Motmting that file system under /users would result in the path 
name /users/jane, which we could use to reach the same directory. 
Next, the operating system verifies that the device contains a valid file 
system. It does so by asking the device driver to read the device directory 
and verifying that the directory has the expected format. Finally, the operating 
system notes in its directory structure that a file system is n1.ounted at the 
specified mount point. This scheme enables the operating system to traverse 
its directory structure, switching among file systems, and even file systems of 
varying types, as appropriate. 
To illustrate file mounting, consider the file system depicted in Figure 
10.13, where the triangles represent subtrees of directories that are of interest. 
Figure 10.13(a) shows an existing file system, while Figure 10.13(b) shows an 
unmounted volume residing on /device/ds!c. At this point, only the files on the 
existing file system can be accessed. Figure 10.14 shows the effects of mounting 

10.4 File-System Mounting 
445 
bill 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 10.13 File system. (a) Existing system. (b) Unmounted volume. 
the volume residing on /device/dsk over /users. If the volume is unmounted, the 
file system is restored to the situation depicted in Figure 10.13. 
Systems impose semantics to clarify functionality. For example, a system 
may disallow a mount over a directory that contains files; or it may make the 
mounted file system available at that directory and obscure the directory's 
existing files until the file system is unmounted, terminating the use of the file 
system and allowing access to the original files in that directory. As another 
example, a system may allow the same file system to be mounted repeatedly, 
at different mount points; or it may only allow one mount per file system. 
Consider the actions of the classic Macintosh operating system. Whenever 
the system encounters a disk for the first time (hard disks are found at boot 
time, and optical disks are seen when they are inserted into the drive), the 
Macintosh operating system searches for a file system on the device. If it finds 
one, it automatically mounts the file system at the root level, adding a folder 
icon on the screen labeled with the name of the file system (as stored in the 
I 
Figure 10.14 Mount point. 

446 
Chapter 10 
10.5 
device directory). The user is then able to click on the icon and thus display the 
newly mounted file system. Mac OS X behaves much like BSD UNIX, on which it 
is based. All file systems are mounted under the /Volumes directory. The Mac 
OS X GUI hides this fact and shows the file systems as if they were all mounted 
at the root level. 
The Microsoft Windows family of operating systems (95, 98, NT, small 
2000, 2003, XP, Vista) maintains an extended two-level directory structure, 
with devices and volumes assigned drive letters. Volumes have a general graph 
directory structure associated with the drive letter. The path to a specific file 
takes the form of drive-letter:\path \to \file. The more recent versions of Windows 
allow a file system to be mounted anywhere in the directory tree, just as 
UNIX does. Windows operating systems automatically discover all devices and 
mount all located file systems at boot time. In some systems, like UNIX, the 
mount commands are explicit. A system configuration file contains a list of 
devices and mount points for automatic mounting at boot time, but other 
mounts may be executed manually. 
Issues concerning file system mounting are further discussed in Section 
11.2.2 and in Appendix A.7.5. 
In the previous sections, we explored the motivation for file sharing and some of 
the difficulties involved in allowing users to share files. Such file sharing is very 
desirable for users who want to collaborate and to reduce the effort required 
to achieve a computing goal. Therefore, user-oriented operating systems must 
accommodate the need to share files in spite of the inherent difficulties. 
In this section, we examine more aspects of file sharing. We begin by 
discussing general issues that arise when multiple users share files. Once 
multiple users are allowed to share files, the challenge is to extend sharing to 
multiple file systems, including remote file systems; we discuss that challenge 
as well. Finally, we consider what to do about conflicting actions occurring on 
shared files. For instance, if multiple users are writing to a file, should all the 
writes be allowed to occurf or should the operating system protect the users' 
actions from one another? 
10.5.1 Multiple Users 
When an operating system accommodates multiple users, the issues of file 
sharing, file naming, and file protection become preeminent. Given a directory 
structure that allows files to be shared by users, the system must mediate the 
file sharing. The system can either allow a user to access the files of other users 
by default or require that a user specifically grant access to the files. These are 
the issues of access control and protection, which are covered in Section 10.6. 
To implement sharing and protection, the system must maintain more file 
and directory attributes than are needed on a single-user system. Although 
many approaches have been taken to meet this requirement, most systems 
have evolved to use the concepts of file (or directory) owner (or user) and group. 
The owner is the user who can change attributes and grant access and who has 
the most control over the file. The group attribute defines a subset of users who 

10.5 
447 
can share access to the file. For example, the owner of a file on a UNIX system 
can issue all operations on a file, while members of the file's group can execute 
one subset of those operations, and all other users can execute another subset 
of operations. Exactly which operations can be executed by group members 
and other users is definable by the file's owner. More details on permission 
attributes are included in the next section. 
The owner and group IDs of a given file (or directory) are stored with the 
other file attributes. When a user requests an operation on a file, the user ID can 
be compared with the owner attribute to determine if the requesting user is the 
owner of the file. Likewise, the group IDs can be compared. The result indicates 
which permissions are applicable. The system then applies those permissions 
to the requested operation and allows or denies it. 
Many systems have multiple local file systems, including volumes of a 
single disk or multiple volumes on multiple attached disks. In these cases, 
the ID checking and permission matching are straightforward, once the file 
systems are mounted. 
10.5.2 Remote File Systems 
With the advent of networks (Chapter 16), communication among remote 
computers became possible. Networking allows the sharing of resources spread 
across a campus or even around the world. One obvious resource to share is 
data in the form of files. 
Through the evolution of network and file technology, remote file-sharing 
methods have changed. The first implemented method involves manually 
transferring files between machines via programs like ftp. The second major 
method uses a 
(DFS) in which remote directories are 
visible from a local machine. In some ways, the third method, the 
is a reversion to the first. A browser is needed to gain access to the 
remote files, and separate operations (essentially a wrapper for ftp) are used 
to transfer files. 
ftp is used for both anonymous and authenticated access. 
allows a user to transfer files without having an account on the remote 
system. The World Wide Web uses anonymous file exchange almost exclusively. 
DFS involves a much tighter integration between the machine that is accessing 
the remote files and the machine providing the files. This integration adds 
complexity, which we describe in this section. 
10.5.2.1 The Client-Server Model 
Remote file systems allow a computer to mom1.t one or more file systems 
from one or more remote machines. In this case, the machine containing the 
files is the server, and the machine seeking access to the files is the client. The 
client-server relationship is common with networked machines. Generally, 
the server declares that a resource is available to clients and specifies exactly 
which resource (in this case, which files) and exactly which clients. A server 
can serve multiple clients, and a client can use multiple servers, depending on 
the implementation details of a given client-server facility. 
The server usually specifies the available files on a volume or directory 
level. Client identification is more difficult. A client can be specified 
network name or other identifier, such as an IP address, but these can be 

448 
Chapter 10 
or imitated. As a result of spoofing, an unauthorized client could be allowed 
access to the server. More secure solutions include secure authentication of the 
client via encrypted keys. Unfortunately, with security come many challenges, 
including ensuring compatibility of the client and server (they must use the 
same encryption algorithms) and security of key exchanges (intercepted keys 
could again allow unauthorized access). Because of the difficulty of solving 
these problems, unsecure authentication methods are most commonly used. 
In the case of UNIX and its network file system (NFS), authentication takes 
place via the client networking information, by default. In this scheme, the 
user's IDs on the client and server must match. lf they do not, the server will 
be unable to determine access rights to files. Consider the example of a user 
who has an ID of 1000 on the client and 2000 on the server. A request from 
the client to the server for a specific file will not be handled appropriately, as 
the server will determine if user 1000 has access to the file rather than basing 
the determination on the real user ID of 2000. Access is thus granted or denied 
based on incorrect authentication information. The server must trust the client 
to present the correct user ID. Note that the NFS protocols allow many-to-many 
relationships. That is, many servers can provide files to many clients. In fact 
a given machine can be both a server to some NFS clients and a client of other 
NFS servers. 
Once the remote file system is mounted, file operation requests are sent 
on behalf of the user across the network to the server via the DFS protocol. 
Typically, a file-open request is sent along with the ID of the requesting user. 
The server then applies the standard access checks to determine if the user has 
credentials to access the file in the mode requested. The request is either allowed 
or denied. If it is allowed, a file handle is returned to the client application, 
and the application then can perform read, write, and other operations on the 
file. The client closes the file when access is completed. The operating system 
may apply semantics similar to those for a local file-system mount or may use 
different semantics. 
10.5.2.2 Distributed Information Systems 
To make client-server systems easier to manage, 
also known as 
provide unified access 
to the information needed for remote computing. The 
provides host-name-to-network-address translations for the entire 
Internet (including the World Wide Web). Before DNS became widespread, 
files containing the same information were sent via e-mail or ftp between all 
networked hosts. This methodology was not scalable. DNS is further discussed 
in Section 16.5.1. 
Other distributed information systems provide user name/password/user 
ID/group ID space for a distributed facility. UNIX systems have employed a wide 
variety of distributed-information methods. Sun Microsystems introduced 
yellow pages (since renamed 
or 
and most of 
the industry adopted its use. It centralizes storage of user names, host names, 
printer information, and the like. Unfortunately, it uses unsecure authentication 
methods, including sending user passwords unencrypted (in clear text) and 
identifying hosts by IP address. Sun's NIS+ is a much more secure replacement 
for NIS but is also much more complicated and has not been widely adopted. 

10.5 
449 
network 
information is used in conjunction with user authentication (user name and 
password) to create a 
that the server uses to decide whether 
to allow or deny access to a requested file system. For this authentication 
to be valid, the user names m.u.st match from machine to machine (as with 
NFS). Microsoft uses two distributed naming structures to provide a single 
name space for users. The older naming technology is 
The newer 
technology, available in Windows XP and Windows 2000, is 
Once established, the distributed naming facility is used by all clients 
servers to authenticate users. 
The industry is moving toward use of the 
as a secure distributed naming mechanism. In fact, active 
is based on LDAP. Sun Microsystems includes LDAP with the 
operating system and allows it to be employed for user authentication as 
well as system-wide retrieval of information, such as availability of printers. 
Conceivably, one distributed LDAP directory could be used by an organization 
to store all user and resource information for all the organization's computers. 
The result would be 
for users, who would enter 
their authentication information once for access to all computers within the 
organization. It would also ease system-administration efforts by combining, 
in one location, information that is currently scattered in various files on each 
system or in different distributed information services. 
10.5.2.3 Failure Modes 
Local file systems can fail for a variety of reasons, including failure of the 
disk containing the file system, corruption of the directory structure or other 
disk-management information (collectively called 
disk-controller 
failure, cable failure, and host-adapter failure. User or system-administrator 
failure can also cause files to be lost or entire directories or volumes to be 
deleted. Many of these failures will cause a host to crash and an error condition 
to be displayed, and human intervention will be required to repair the damage. 
Remote file systems have even more failure modes. Because of the 
complexity of network systems and the required interactions between remote 
machines, many more problems can interfere with the proper operation of 
remote file systems. In the case of networks, the network can be interrupted 
between two hosts. Such interruptions can result from hardware failure, poor 
hardware configuration, or networking implementation issues. Although some 
networks have built-in resiliency, including multiple paths between hosts, 
many do not. Any single failure can thus interrupt the flow of DFS commands. 
Consider a client in the midst of using a remote file system. It has files open 
from the remote host; among other activities, it may be performing directory 
lookups to open files, reading or writing data to files, and closing files. Now 
consider a partitioning of the network, a crash of the server, or even a scheduled 
shutdown of the server. Suddenly, the remote file system is no longer reachable. 
This scenario is rather common, so it would not be appropriate for the client 
system to act as it would if a local file system were lost. Rather, the system can 
either terminate all operations to the lost server or delay operations until the 
server is again reachable. These failure semantics are defined and in<plemented 
as part of the remote-file-system protocol. Termination of all operations can 

450 
Chapter 10 
result in users' losing data-and patience. Thus, most DFS protocols either 
enforce or allow delaying of file-system operations to rencote hosts, with the 
hope that the remote host will become available again. 
To implement this kind of recovery from failure, some kind of 
may be maintained on both the client and the server. If both server 
and client maintain knowledge of their current activities and open files, then 
they can seamlessly recover from a failure. In the situation where the server 
crashes but must recognize that it has remotely rnounted exported file systems 
and opened files, NFS takes a simple approach, implementing a 
DFS. 
In essence, it assumes that a client request for a file read or write would not 
have occurred unless the file system had been remotely mounted and the file 
had been previously open. The NFS protocol carries all the information needed 
to locate the appropriate file and perform the requested operation. Similarly, 
it does not track which clients have the exported volumes mounted, again 
assuming that if a request comes in, it must be legitimate. While this stateless 
approach makes NFS resilient and rather easy to implement, it also makes it 
unsecure. For example, forged read or write requests could be allowed by an 
NFS server even though the requisite mount request and permission check 
had not taken place. These issues are addressed in the industry standard NFS 
Version 4, in which NFS is made stateful to improve its security, performance, 
and functionality. 
10.5.3 Consistency Semantics 
represent an important criterion for evaluating any 
file system that supports file sharing. These semantics specify how multiple 
users of a system are to access a shared file simultaneously. In particular, they 
specify when modifications of data by one user will be observable by other 
users. These semantics are typically implemented as code with the file system. 
Consistency semantics are directly related to the process-synchronization 
algorithms of Chapter 6. However, the complex algorithms of that chapter tend 
not to be implemented in the case of file I/0 because of the great latencies and 
slow transfer rates of disks and networks. For example, performing an atomic 
transaction to a remote disk could involve several network communications, 
several disk reads and writes, or both. Systems that attempt such a full set of 
functionalities tend to perform poorly. A successful implementation of complex 
sharing semantics can be found in the Andrew file system. 
For the following discussion, we assume that a series of file accesses (that 
is, reads and writes) attempted by a user to the same file is always enclosed 
between the open() and close() operations. The series of accesses between 
the open() and close() operations makes up a 
To illustrate the 
concept, we sketch several prominent examples of consistency semantics. 
10.5.3.1 UNIX Semantics 
The UNIX file system (Chapter 17) uses the following consistency semantics: 
Writes to an open file by a user are visible immediately to other users who 
have this file open. 
One mode of sharing allows users to share the pointer of current location 
into the file. Thus, the advancing of the pointer by one user affects all 

10.6 
10.6 
451 
sharing users. Here, a file has a single image that interleaves all accesses, 
regardless of their origin. 
In the UNIX semantics, a file is associated with a single physical image that 
is accessed as an exclusive resource. Contention for this single image causes 
delays in user processes. 
10.5.3.2 
Session Semantics 
The Andrew file system (AFS) (Chapter 17) uses the following consistency 
semantics: 
Writes to an open file by a user are not visible immediately to other users 
that have the same file open. 
Once a file is closed, the changes made to it are visible only in sessions 
starting later. Already open instances of the file do not reflect these changes. 
According to these semantics, a file may be associated temporarily with several 
(possibly different) images at the same time. Consequently, multiple users are 
allowed to perform both read and write accesses concurrently on their images 
of the file, without delay. Almost no constraints are enforced on scheduling 
accesses. 
10.5.3.3 Immutable-Shared-Files Semantics 
A unique approach is that of 
Once a file is declared 
as shared by its creator, it cam1ot be modified. An immutable £ile has two key 
properties: its name may not be reused, and its contents may not be altered. 
Thus, the name of an immutable file signifies that the contents of the file are 
fixed. The implementation of these semantics in a distributed system (Chapter 
17) is simple, because the sharing is disciplined (read-only). 
When information is stored in a computer system, we want to keep it safe 
from physical damage (the issue of reliability) and improper access (the issue 
of protection). 
Reliability is generally provided by duplicate copies of files. Many comput-
ers have systems programs that automatically (or through computer-operator 
intervention) copy disk files to tape at regular intervals (once per day or week 
or month) to maintain a copy should a file system be accidentally destroyed. 
File systems can be damaged by hardware problems (such as errors in reading 
or writing), power surges or failures, head crashes, dirt, temperature extremes, 
and vandalism. Files may be deleted accidentally. Bugs in the file-system soft-
ware can also cause file contents to be lost. Reliability is covered in more detail 
in Chapter 12. 
Protection can be provided in many ways. For a small single-user system, 
we might provide protection by physically removing the floppy disks and 
locking them in a desk drawer or file cabinet. In a multiuser system, however, 
other mechanisms are needed. 

11.1 
c 
As we saw in Chapter 10, the file system provides the mechanism for on-line 
storage and access to file contents, including data and programs. The file system 
resides permanently on secondary storage, which is designed to hold a large 
amount of data permanently. This chapter is primarily concerned with issues 
surrounding file storage and access on the most common secondary-storage 
medium, the disk. We explore ways to structure file use, to allocate disk space, 
to recover freed space, to track the locations of data, and to interface other 
parts of the operating system to secondary storage. Performance issues are 
considered throughout the chapter. 
To describe the details of implementing local file systems and directory 
structures. 
To describe the implementation of remote file systems. 
To discuss block allocation and free-block algorithms and trade-offs. 
Disks provide the bulk of secondary storage on which a file system is 
maintained. They have two characteristics that make them a convenient 
medium for storing multiple files: 
A disk can be rewritten in place; it is possible to read a block from the 
disk, modify the block, and write it back into the sance place. 
A disk can access directly any block of information it contains. Thus, it is 
simple to access any file either sequentially or randomly, and switching 
from one file to another requires only moving the read-write heads and 
waiting for the disk to rotate. 
We discuss disk structure in great detail in Chapter 12. 
461 

462 
Chapter 11 
To improve I/0 efficiency, I/0 transfers between memory and disk are 
performed in units of blocks. Each block has one or more sectors. Depending 
on the disk drive, sector size varies from 32 bytes to 4,096 bytes; the usual size 
is 512 bytes. 
provide efficient and convenient access to the disk by allowing 
data to be stored, located, and retrieved easily. A file system poses two quite 
different design problems. The first problem is defining how the file system 
should look to the user. This task involves defining a file and its attributes, 
the operations allowed on a file, and the directory structure for organizing 
files. The second problem is creating algorithms and data structures to map the 
logical file system onto the physical secondary-storage devices. 
The file system itself is generally composed of many different levels. The 
structure shown in Figure 11.1 is an example of a layered design. Each level in 
the design uses the features of lower levels to create new features for use by 
higher levels. 
The lowest level, the I/O control, consists of 
and interrupt 
handlers to transfer information between the main memory and the disk 
system. A device driver can be thought of as a translator. Its input consists of 
high-level commands such as "retrieve block 123." Its output consists of low-
level, hardware-specific instructions that are used by the hardware controller, 
which interfaces the I/0 device to the rest of the system. The device driver 
usually writes specific bit patterns to special locations in the I/0 controller's 
memory to tell the controller which device location to act on and what actions 
to take. The details of device drivers and the I/O infrastructure are covered in 
Chapter 13. 
The 
needs only to issue generic commands to the 
appropriate device driver to read and write physical blocks on the disk. Each 
physical block is identified by its numeric disk address (for example, drive 1, 
cylilcder 73, track 2, sector 10). This layer also manages the memory buffers 
and caches that hold various file-system, directory, and data blocks. A block 
application programs 
~ 
logical file system 
~ 
file-organization module 
~ 
basic file system 
~ 
1/0 control 
devices 
Figure 11.1 
Layered file system. 

11.1 
463 
in the buffer is allocated before the transfer of a disk block can occur. When 
the buffer is full, the buffer m~anager must find more buffer ncemory or free 
up buffer space to allow a requested I/O to complete. Caches are used to hold 
frequently used file-system metadata to improve performance, so managing 
their contents is critical for optimum system performance. 
The 
knows about files and their logical blocks, 
as well as physical blocks. By knowing the type of file allocation used and 
the location of the file, the file-organization module can translate logical block 
addresses to physical block addresses for the basic file system to transfer. 
Each file's logical blocks are numbered from 0 (or 1) through N. Since the 
physical blocks containing the data usually do not match the logical numbers, 
a translation is needed to locate each block. The file-organization module also 
includes the free-space manager, which tracks unallocated blocks and provides 
these blocks to the file-organization module when requested. 
Finally, the 
f!Je 
manages metadata information. Metadata 
includes all of the file-system structure except the actual data (or contents of the 
files). The logical file system manages the directory structure to provide the file-
organization module with the information the latter needs, given a symbolic 
file name. It maintains file structure via file-control blocks. A flle-corttml 
(an 
in most UNIX file systems) contains information about the 
file, including ownership, permissions, and location of the file contents. The 
logical file system is also responsible for protection and security, as discussed 
in Chapters 10 and 14. 
When a layered structure is used for file-system implementation, duplica-
tion of code is minimized. The I/O control and sometimes the basic file-system 
code can be used by multiple file systems. Each file system can then have its 
own logical file-system and file-organization modules. Unfortunately, layering 
can introduce more operating system overhead, which may result in decreased 
performance. The use of layering, including the decision about how many 
layers to use and what each layer should do, is a major challenge in designing 
new systems. 
Many file systems are in use today. Most operating systems support 
more than one. For example, most CD-ROMs are written in the ISO 9660 
format, a standard format agreed on by CD-ROM manufacturers. In addition 
to removable-media file systems, each operating system has one or more disk-
based file systems. UNIX uses the 
fEe 
which is based on 
the Berkeley Fast File System (FFS). Windows NT, 2000, and XP support disk 
file-system formats of FAT, FAT32, and NTFS (or Windows NT File System), as 
well as CD-ROM, DVD, and floppy-disk file-system formats. Although Linux 
supports over forty different file systerns, the standard Linux file system is 
known as the 
with the most common versions being 
ext2 and ext3. There are also distributed file systems in which a file system on 
a server is mounted by one or more client computers across a network. 
File-system research continues to be an active area of operating-system 
design and implementation. Coogle created its own file system to meet the 
company's specific storage and retrieval needs. Another interesting project 
is the FUSE file-system, which provides flexibility in file-system use by 
implementing and executing file systems as user-level rather than kernel-level 
code. Using FUSE, a user can add a new file system to a variety of operating 
systems and can use that file system to manage her files. 

464 
Chapter 11 
11.2 
As was described in Section 10.1.2, operating systems implement open() 
and close() systems calls for processes to request access to file contents. 
In this section, we delve into the structures and operations used to implement 
file-system operations. 
11.2.1 Overview 
Several on-disk and in-memory structures are used to implement a file system. 
These structures vary depending on the operating system and the file system, 
but some general principles apply. 
On disk, the file system may contain information about how to boot an 
operating system stored there, the total number of blocks, the number and 
location of free blocks, the directory structure, and individual files. Many of 
these structures are detailed throughout the remainder of this chapter; here, 
we describe them briefly: 
A 
(per volume) can contain information needed by the 
system to boot an operating system from that volume. If the disk does not 
contain an operating system, this block can be empty. It is typically the 
first block of a volume. In UFS, it is called the 
b,Jsck; in NTFS, it is the 
(per volume) contains volume (or partition) 
details, such as the number of blocks in the partition, the size of the blocks, 
a free-block count and free-block pointers, and a free-FCB count and FCB 
pointers. In UFS, this is called a 
in NTFS, it is stored in the 
A directory structure (per file system) is used to organize the files. In UFS, 
this includes file names and associated inode numbers. In NTFS, it is stored 
in the master file table. 
A per-file FCB contains many details about the file. It has a unique 
identifier number to allow association with a directory entry. In NTFS, 
this information is actually stored within the master file table, which uses 
a relational database structure, with a row per file. 
The in-memory in.formation is used for both file-system management and 
performance improvement via caching. The data are loaded at mount time, 
updated during file-system operations, and discarded at dismount. Several 
types of structures may be included. 
An in-memory 
volume. 
contains information about each mounted 
An in-memory directory-structure cache holds the directory information 
of recently accessed directories. (For directories at which volumes are 
mounted, it can contain a pointer to the volume table.) 
The 
contains a copy of the FCB of each open 
file, as well as other information. 

11.2 
465 
file dates(create, access, write) 
file owner,. group, ACL 
file data blocks or pointers to file data blocks 
Figure 11.2 A typical file-control block. 
The 
contains a pointer to the appropriate entry 
in the system-wide open-file table, as well as other information. 
Buffers hold file-system blocks when they are being read from disk or 
written to disk. 
To create a new file, an application program calls the logical file system. 
The logical file system knows the format of the directory structures. To create a 
new file, it allocates a new FCB. (Alternatively, if the file-system implementation 
creates all FCBs at file-system creation time, an FCB is allocated from the set 
of free FCBs.) The system then reads the appropriate directory into memory, 
updates it with the new file name and FCB, and writes it back to the disk. A 
typical FCB is shown in Figure 11.2. 
Some operating systems, including UNIX, treat a directory exactly the same 
as a file-one with a "type" field indicating that it is a directory. Other operating 
systems, includii<g Windows NT, implement separate system calls for files and 
directories and treat directories as entities separate from files. Whatever the 
larger structural issues, the logical file system can call the file-organization 
module to map the directory I/0 into disk-block numbers, which are passed 
on to the basic file system and I/O control system. 
Now that a file has been created, it can be used for I/0. First, though, it 
must be opened. The open () call passes a file name to the logical file system. 
The open() system call first searches the system-wide open-file table to see 
if the file is already in use by another process. If it is, a per-process open-file 
table entry is created pointing to the existing system-wide open-file table. This 
algorithm can save substantial overhead. If the file is not already open, the 
directory structure is searched for the given file name. Parts of the directory 
structure are usually cached in memory to speed directory operations. Once 
the file is found, the FCB is copied into a system-wide open-file table in memory. 
This table not only stores the FCB but also tracks the number of processes that 
have the file open. 
Next, an entry is made in the per-process open-file table, with a pointer 
to the entry in the system-wide open-file table and some other fields. These 
other fields may include a pointer to the current location in the file (for the next 
read() or write() operation) and the access mode in which the file is open. 
The open() call returns a pointer to the appropriate entry in the per-process 

466 
Chapter 11 
user space 
user space 
kernel memory 
(a) 
kernel memory 
(b) 
,-:---..,...---:+-t-ilEJ D 
DO 
secondary storage 
secondary storage 
Figure 11.3 In-memory file-system structures. (a) File open. (b) File read. 
file-system table. All file operations are then performed via this pointer. The 
file name may not be part of the open-file table, as the system has no use for 
it once the appropriate FCB is located on disk. It could be cached, though, to 
save time on subsequent opens of the same file. The name given to the entry 
varies. UNIX systems refer to it as a 
Windows refers to it as a 
When a process closes the file, the per-process table entry is removed, and 
the system-wide entry's open count is decremented. When all users that have 
opened the file close it, any updated metadata is copied back to the disk-based 
directory structure, and the system-wide open-file table entry is removed. 
Some systems complicate this scheme further by using the file system as an 
interface to other system aspects, such as networking. For example, in UFS, the 
system-wide open-file table holds the inodes and other information for files 
and directories. It also holds similar information for network connections and 
devices. In this way, one mechanism can be used for multiple purposes. 
The caching aspects of file-system structures should not be overlooked. 
Most systems keep all information about an open file, except for its actual data 
blocks, in memory. The BSD UNIX system is typical in its use of caches wherever 
disk I/0 can be saved. Its average cache hit rate of 85 percent shows that these 
techniques are well worth implementing. The BSD UNIX system is described 
fully in Appendix A. 
The operating structures of a file-system implementation are summarized 
in Figure 11.3. 

11.2 
467 
11.2.2 Partitions and Mounting 
The layout of a disk can have many variations, depending on the operating 
system. A disk can be sliced into multiple partitions, or a volume can span 
multiple partitions on multiple disks. The former layout is discussed here, 
while the latter, which is more appropriately considered a form of RAID, is 
covered in Section 12.7. 
Each partition can be either "raw," containing no file system, or "cooked," 
containing a file system. 
is used where no file system is appropriate. 
UNIX swap space can use a raw partition, for example, as it uses its own format 
on disk and does not use a file system. Likewise, some databases use raw disk 
and format the data to suit their needs. Raw disk can also hold information 
needed by disk RAID systems, such as bit maps indicating which blocks are 
mirrored and which have changed and need to be mirrored. Similarly, raw disk 
can contain a miniature database holding RAID configuration information, such 
as which disks are members of each RAID set. Raw disk use is further discussed 
in Section 12.5.1. 
Boot information can be stored in a separate partition. Again, it has its 
own format, because at boot time the system does not have the file-system 
code loaded and therefore cannot interpret the file-system format. Rather, boot 
information is usually a sequential series of blocks, loaded as an image into 
memory. Execution of the image starts at a predefined location, such as the first 
byte. This 
in turn knows enough about the file-system structure to 
be able to find and load the kernel and start it executing. It can contain more 
than the instructions for how to boot a specific operating system. For instance, 
PCs and other systems can be 
Multiple operating systems can be 
installed on such a system. How does the system know which one to boot? 
A boot loader that understands multiple file systems and multiple operating 
systems can occupy the boot space. Once loaded, it can boot one of the operating 
systems available on the disk. The disk can have multiple partitions, each 
containing a different type of file system and a different operating system. 
The 
which contains the operating-system kernel and some-
times other system files, is mounted at boot time. Other volumes can be 
automatically mounted at boot or manually mounted later, depending on 
the operating system. As part of a successful mount operation, the operating 
system verifies that the device contains a valid file system. It does so by asking 
the device driver to read the device directory and verifying that the directory 
has the expected format. If the format is invalid, the partition must have 
its consistency checked and possibly corrected, either with or without user 
intervention. Finally, the operating system notes in its in-memory mount table 
that a file system is mounted, along with the type of the file system. The details 
of this function depend on the operating system. Microsoft Windows-based 
systems mount each volume in a separate name space, denoted by a letter 
and a colon. To record that a file system is mounted at F:, for example, the 
operating system places a pointer to the file system in a field of the device 
structure corresponding to F: . When a process specifies the driver letter, 
the operating system finds the appropriate file-system pointer and traverses 
the directory structures on that device to find the specified file or directory. 
Later versions of Windows can mount a file system at any point within the 
existing directory structure. 

468 
Chapter 11 
On UNIX, file systems can be mounted at any directory. Mounting is 
implemented by setting a flag in the in-memory copy of the inode for that 
directory. The flag indicates that the directory is a mount point. A field then 
points to an entry in the mount table, indicating which device is mounted there. 
The mount table entry contains a pointer to the superblock of the file system. on 
that device. This scheme enables the operating system to traverse its directory 
structure, switching seamlessly among file systems of varying types. 
11.2.3 Virtual File Systems 
The previous section m.akes it clear that modern operating systems must 
concurrently support multiple types of file systems. But how does an operating 
system allow multiple types of file systems to be integrated into a directory 
structure? And how can users seamlessly move between file-system types 
as they navigate the file-system space? We now discuss some of these 
implementation details. 
An obvious but suboptimal method of implementing multiple types of file 
systems is to write directory and file routines for each type. Instead, however, 
most operating systems, including UNIX, use object-oriented techniques to 
simplify, organize, and modularize the implementation. The use of these 
methods allows very dissimilar file-system types to be implemented within 
the same structure, including network file systems, such as NFS. Users can 
access files that are contained within multiple file systems on the local disk or 
even on file systems available across the network. 
Data structures and procedures are used to isolate the basic system-
call functionality from the implementation details. Thus, the file-system 
implementation consists of three major layers, as depicted schematically in 
Figure 11.4. The first layer is the file-system interface, based on the open(), 
read(), write(), and close() calls and on file descriptors. 
The second layer is called the 
layer. The VFS layer 
serves two important functions: 
It separates file-system-generic operations from their implementation 
by defining a clean VFS interface. Several implementations for the VFS 
interface may coexist on the same machine, allowing transparent access 
to different types of file systems mounted locally. 
It provides a mechanism for uniquely representing a file throughout a 
network. The VFS is based on a file-representation structure, called a 
that contains a numerical designator for a network-wide unique 
file. (UNIX inodes are unique within only a single file system.) This 
network-wide uniqueness is required for support of network file systems. 
The kernel maintains one vnode structure for each active node (file or 
directory). 
Thus, the VFS distinguishes local files from remote ones, and local files are 
further distinguished according to their file-system types. 
The VFS activates file-system-specific operations to handle local requests 
according to their file-system types and calls the NFS protocol procedures for 
remote requests. File handles are constructed from the relevant vnodes and 
are passed as arguments to these procedures. The layer implementing the 

11.2 
469 
network 
Figure 11.4 Schematic view of a virtual file system. 
file-system type or the remote-file-system protocol is the third layer of the 
architecture. 
Let's briefly examine the VFS architecture in Linux. The four main object 
types defined by the Linux VFS are: 
The inode object, which represents an individual file 
The file object, which represents an open file 
The superblock object, which represents an entire file system 
The dentry object, which represents an individual directory entry 
For each of these four object types, the VFS defines a set of operations that 
must be implemented. Every object of one of these types contains a pointer to 
a f1.mction table. The function table lists the addresses of the actual functions 
that implement the defined operations for that particular object. For example, 
an abbreviated API for some of the operations for the file object include: 
int open ( . . . ) -Open a file. 
ssize_t read(. . . ) -Read from a file. 
ssize_t write (. . . ) -Write to a file. 
int mmap( ... ) -Memory-map a file. 
An implementation of the file object for a specific file type is required to imple-
ment each function specified in the definition of the file object. (The complete 
definition ofthe file object is specified in the struct f ile_operat ions, which 
is located in the file /usr/include/linux/fs .h.) 

470 
Chapter 11 
11.3 
Thus, the VFS software layer can perform an operation on one of these 
objects by calling the appropriate function from the object's function table, 
without having to know in advance exactly what kind of object it is dealing 
with. The VFS does not know, or care, whether an inode represents a disk file, 
a directory file, or a remote file. The appropriate function for that file's read() 
operation will always be at the same place in its function table, and the VFS 
software layer will call that function without caring how the data are actually 
read. 
The selection of directory-allocation and directory-management algorithms 
significantly affects the efficiency, performance, and reliability of the file 
system. In this section, we discuss the trade-offs involved in choosing one 
of these algorithms. 
11.3.1 Linear List 
The simplest method of implementing a directory is to use a linear list of file 
names with pointers to the data blocks. This method is simple to program 
but time-consuming to execute. To create a new file, we must first search the 
directory to be sure that no existing file has the same name. Then, we add a 
new entry at the end of the directory. To delete a file, we search the directory for 
the named file and then release the space allocated to it. To reuse the directory 
entry, we can do one of several things. We can mark the entry as unused (by 
assigning it a special name, such as an all-blank name, or with a used -unused 
bit in each entry), or we can attach it to a list of free directory entries. A third 
alternative is to copy the last entry in the directory into the freed location and 
to decrease the length of the directory. A linked list can also be used to decrease 
the time required to delete a file. 
The real disadvantage of a linear list of directory entries is that finding a 
file requires a linear search. Directory information is used frequently, and users 
will notice if access to it is slow. In fact, many operating systems implement a 
software cache to store the most recently used directory information. A cache 
hit avoids the need to constantly reread the information from disk. A sorted 
list allows a binary search and decreases the average search time. However, the 
requirement that the list be kept sorted may complicate creating and deleting 
files, since we may have to move substantial amounts of directory information 
to maintain a sorted directory. A more sophisticated tree data structure, such 
as a B-h·ee, might help here. An advantage of the sorted list is that a sorted 
directory listing can be produced without a separate sort step. 
11.3.2 Hash Table 
Another data structure used for a file directory is a 
With this 
method, a linear list stores the directory entries, but a hash data structure is 
also used. The hash table takes a value computed from the file name and returns 
a pointer to the file name in the linear list. Therefore, it can greatly decrease the 
directory search time. Insertion and deletion are also fairly straightforward, 
although some provision must be made for collisions-situations in which 
two file names hash to the same location. 

11.4 
11.4 
471 
The major difficulties with a hash table are its generally fixed size and the 
dependence of the hash function on that size. For example, assume that we 
make a linear-probing hash table that holds 64 entries. The hash function 
converts file names into integers from 0 to 63, for instance, by using the 
remainder of a division by 64. If we later try to create a 65th file, we must 
enlarge the directory hash table-say, to 128 entries. As a result, we need 
a new hash function that must map file narnes to the range 0 to 127, and we 
must reorganize the existing directory entries to reflect their new hash-function 
values. 
Alternatively, a chained-overflow hash table can be used. Each hash entry 
can be a linked list instead of an individual value, and we can resolve collisions 
by adding the new entry to the linked list. Lookups may be somewhat slowed, 
because searching for a name might require stepping through a linked list of 
colliding table entries. Still, this method is likely to be much faster than a linear 
search through the entire directory. 
The direct-access nature of disks allows us flexibility in the implementation of 
files. In almost every case, many files are stored on the same disk. The main 
problem is how to allocate space to these files so that disk space is utilized 
effectively and files can be accessed quickly. Three major methods of allocating 
disk space are in wide use: contiguous, linked, and indexed. Each method has 
advantages and disadvantages. Some systems (such as Data General's RDOS 
for its Nova line of computers) support all three. More commonly, a system 
uses one method for all files within a file-system type. 
11.4.1 Contiguous Allocation 
requires that each file occupy a set of contiguous blocks 
on 
disk. Disk addresses define a linear ordering on the disk. With this 
ordering, assuming that only one job is accessil1.g the disk, accessing block b + 
1 after block b normally requires no head movement. When head movement 
is needed (from the last sector of one cylil1.der to the first sector of the next 
cylinder), the head need only move from one track to the next. Thus, the number 
of disk seeks required for accessing contiguously allocated files is minimal, as 
is seek time when a seek is finally needed. The IBM VM/CMS operatil1.g system 
uses contiguous allocation because it provides such good performance. 
Contiguous allocation of a file is defined by the disk address and length (in 
block units) of the first block. If the file is n blocks long and starts at location 
b, then it occupies blocks b, b + 1, b + 2, ... , b + n - 1. The directory entry for 
each file indicates the address of the starting block and the length of the area 
allocated for this file (Figure 11.5). 
Accessing a file that has been allocated contiguously is easy. For sequential 
access, the file system remembers the disk address of the last block referenced 
and, when necessary, reads the next block. For direct access to block i of a 
file that starts at block b, we can immediately access block b + i. Thus, both 
sequential and direct access can be supported by contiguous allocation. 

472 
Chapter 11 
directory 
file 
start length 
count 
0 
2 
tr 
14 
3 
mail 
19 
6 
list 
28 
4 
f 
6 
2 
Figure 1 i .5 Contiguous allocation of disk space. 
Contiguous allocation has some problems, however. One difficulty is 
finding space for a new file. The system chosen to manage free space determines 
how this task is accomplished; these management systems are discussed in 
Section 11.5. Any management system can be used, but some are slower than 
others. 
The contiguous-allocation problem can be seen as a particular application 
of the general 
problem discussed in Section 8.3, 
which involves 
to satisfy a request of size n from a list of free holes. First 
fit and best fit are the most common strategies used to select a free hole from 
the set of available holes. Simulations have shown that both first fit and best fit 
are more efficient than worst fit in terms of both time and storage utilization. 
Neither first fit nor best fit is clearly best in terms of storage utilization, but 
first fit is generally faster. 
All these algorithms suffer from the problem of 
As files are allocated and deleted, the free disk space is broken into 
pieces. 
External fragmentation exists whenever free space is broken into chunks. It 
becomes a problem when the largest contiguous chunk is insufficient for a 
request; storage is fragncented into a number of holes, none of which is large 
enough to store the data. Depending on the total amount of disk storage and the 
average file size, external fragmentation may be a minor or a major problem. 
One strategy for preventing loss of significant amounts of disk space to 
external fragmentation is to copy an entire file system onto another disk or 
tape. The original disk is then freed completely, creating one large contiguous 
free space. We then copy the files back onto the original disk by allocating 
contiguous space from this one large hole. This scheme effectively 
all free space into one contiguous space, solving the fragmentation 
However, the cost of this compaction is time and it can be particularly severe for 
large hard disks that use contiguous allocation, where compacting all the space 

11.4 
473 
may take hours and may be necessary on a weekly basis. Some systems require 
that this function be done 
with the file system unmounted. During 
this 
normal system operation generally cannot be permitted, so 
such compaction is avoided at all costs on production machines. Most modern 
systems that need defragmentation can perform it 
during normal 
system operations, but the performance penalty can be substantial. 
Another problem with contiguous allocation is determining how much 
space is needed for a file. When the file is created, the total amount of space 
it will need must be found and allocated. How does the creator (program or 
person) know the size of the file to be created? In some cases, this detennination 
may be fairly simple (copying an existing file, for example); in general, however, 
the size of an output file may be difficult to estimate. 
If we allocate too little space to a file, we may find that the file cannot 
be extended. Especially with a best-fit allocation strategy, the space on both 
sides of the file may be in use. Hence, we cannot make the file larger in place. 
Two possibilities then exist. First, the user program can be terminated, with 
an appropriate error message. The user must then allocate more space and 
run the program again. These repeated runs may be costly. To prevent them, 
the user will normally overestimate the amount of space needed, resulting in 
considerable wasted space. The other possibility is to find a larger hole, copy 
the contents of the file to the new space, and release the previous space. This 
series of actions can be repeated as long as space exists, although it can be time 
consuming. However, the user need never be informed explicitly about what 
is happening; the system continues despite the problem, although more and 
more slowly. 
Even if the total amount of space needed for a file is known in advance, 
preallocation may be inefficient. A file that will grow slowly over a long period 
(months or years) must be allocated enough space for its final size, even though 
much of that space will be unused for a long time. The file therefore has a large 
amount of internal fragmentation. 
To minimize these drawbacks, some operating systems use a modified 
contiguous-allocation scheme. Here, a contiguous chunk of space is allocated 
initially; then, if that amount proves not to be large enough, another chunk of 
contiguous space, known as an 
is added. The location of a file's blocks 
is then recorded as a location and a block count, plus a link to the first block 
of the next extent. On some systems, the owner of the file can set the extent 
size, but this setting results in inefficiencies if the owner is incorrect. Internal 
fragm.entation can still be a problem if the extents are too large, and external 
fragmentation can become a problem as extents of varying sizes are allocated 
and deallocated. The commercial Veritas file system uses extents to optimize 
performance. It is a high-performance replacement for the standard UNIX UFS. 
11.4.2 Linked Allocation 
solves all problems of contiguous allocation. With linked 
allocation, each file is a linked list of disk blocks; the disk blocks may be 
scattered anywhere on the disk. The directory contains a pointer to the first 
and last blocks of the file. For example, a file of five blocks might start at block 
9 and continue at block 16, then block 1, then block 10, and finally block 25 
(Figure 11.6). Each block contains a pointer to the next block. These pointers 

474 
Chapter 11 
directory 
12 
16 
170180190 
20021~_20_.~23_0-4------------~ 
2402Sc.51:260270 
280290300310 
Figure i 1.6 Linked allocation of disk space. 
are not made available to the user. Thus, if each block is 512 bytes in size, and 
a disk address (the poileter) requires 4 bytes, then the user sees blocks of 508 
bytes. 
To create a new file, we simply create a new entry ile the directory. With 
linked allocation, each directory entry has a pointer to the first disk block of the 
file. This pointer is initialized to nil (the end-of-list pointer value) to signify an 
empty file. The size field is also set to 0. A write to the file causes the free-space 
management system to filed a free block, and this new block is written to 
and is linked to the end of the file. To read a file, we simply read blocks by 
following the pointers from block to block. There is no external fragmentation 
with linked allocation, and any free block on the free-space list can be used to 
satisfy a request. The size of a file need not be declared when that file is created. 
A file can continue to grow as long as free blocks are available. Consequently, 
it is never necessary to compact disk space. 
Linked allocation does have disadvantages, however. The major problem 
is that it can be used effectively only for sequential-access files. To filed the 
ith block of a file, we must start at the begirueing of that file and follow the 
pointers rnetil we get to the ith block. Each access to a pointer requires a disk 
read, and some require a disk seek. Consequently, it is inefficient to support a 
direct-access capability for linked-allocation files. 
Another disadvantage is the space required for the pointers. If a pointer 
requires 4 bytes out of a 512-byte block, then 0.78 percent of the disk is being 
used for pointers, rather than for information. Each file requires slightly more 
space than it would otherwise. 
The usual solution to this problem is to collect blocks into multiples, called 
and to allocate clusters rather than blocks. For instance, the file system 
may define a cluster as four blocks and operate on the disk only in cluster 
units. Pointers then use a much smaller percentage of the file's disk space. 
This method allows the logical-to-physical block mapping to remain simple 

11.4 
475 
but improves disk throughput (because fewer disk-head seeks are required) 
and decreases the space needed for block allocation and free-list management. 
The cost of this approach is an increase in internal fragmentation, because 
more space is wasted when a cluster is partially full than when a block is 
partially full. Clusters can be used to improve the disk-access time for many 
other algorithms as welt so they are used in most file systems. 
Yet another problem of linked allocation is reliability. Recall that the files 
are linked together by pointers scattered all over the disk, and consider what 
would happen if a pointer were lost or damaged. A bug in the operating-system 
software or a disk hardware failure might result in picking up the wrong 
pointer. This error could in turn result in linking into the free-space list or into 
another file. One partial solution is to use doubly linked lists, and another is 
to store the file name and relative block number in each block; however, these 
schemes require even more overhead for each file. 
An important variation on linked allocation is the use of a 
(FAT!. This simple but efficient method of disk-space allocation is used 
by the MS-DOS and OS/2 operating systems. A section of disk at the beginning 
of each volume is set aside to contain the table. The table has one entry for 
each disk block and is indexed by block number. The FAT is used in much the 
same way as a linked list. The directory entry contains the block number of the 
first block of the file. The table entry indexed by that block number contains 
the block number of the next block in the file. This chain continues until it 
reaches the last block, which has a special end-of-file value as the table entry. 
An unused block is indicated by a table value of 0. Allocating a new block to 
a file is a simple matter of finding the first 0-valued table entry and replacing 
the previous end-of-file value with the address of the new block. The 0 is then 
replaced with the end-of-file value. An illustrative example is the FAT structure 
shown in Figure 11.7 for a file consisting of disk blocks 217, 618, and 339. 
directory entry 
name 
start block 
0 
217 
618 
339 
-
618 
339 
number of disk blocks 
-1 
FAT 
Figure 11.7 File-allocation table. 

476 
Chapter 11 
The FAT allocation scheme can result in a significant number of disk head 
seeks, unless the FAT is cached. The disk head must move to the start of the 
volume to read the FAT and find the location of the block in question, then 
move to the location of the block itself. In the worst case, both moves occur for 
each of the blocks. A benefit is that random-access time is improved, because 
the disk head can find the location of any block by reading the information in 
the FAT. 
11.4.3 Indexed Allocation 
Linked allocation solves the external-fragmentation and size-declaration prob-
lems of contiguous allocation. However, in the absence of a FAT, linked 
allocation cannot support efficient direct access, since the pointers to the blocks 
are scattered with the blocks themselves all over the disk and must be retrieved 
in order. 
solves this problem by bringil1.g all the pointers 
together into one location: the 
blo;ct:. 
Each file has its own index block, which is an array of disk-block addresses. 
The i th entry in the index block points to the i 111 block of the file. The directory 
contains the address of the index block (Figure 11.8). To find and read the i 1Jz 
block, we use the pointer in the i 1lz index-block entry. This scheme is similar to 
the paging scheme described il1. Section 8.4. 
When the file is created, all pointers in the index block are set to nil. When 
the ith block is first written, a block is obtained from the free-space manage1~ 
and its address is put in the ith index-block entry. 
Indexed allocation supports direct access, without suffering from external 
fragmentation, because any free block on the disk can satisfy a request for more 
space. Indexed allocation does suffer from wasted space, however. The pointer 
overhead of the index block is generally greater than the pointer overhead of 
linked allocation. Consider a common case in which we have a file of only one 
or two blocks. With linked allocation, we lose the space of only one pointer per 
directory 
file 
jeep 
16 
Figure 11.8 Indexed allocation of disk space. 

11.4 Allocation Methods 
477 
block. With indexed allocation, an entire index block must be allocated, even 
if only one or two pointers will be non-nil. 
This point raises the question of how large the index block should be. Every 
file must have an index block, so we want the index block to be as small as 
possible. If the index block is too small, however, it will not be able to hold 
enough pointers for a large file, and a mechanism will have to be available to 
deal with this issue. Mechanisms for this purpose include the following: 
c Linked scheme. An index block is normally one disk block. Thus, it can 
be read and written directly by itself. To allow for large files, we can link 
together several index blocks. For example, an index block might contain a 
small header giving the name of the file and a set of the first 100 disk-block 
addresses. The next address (the last word in the index block) is nil (for a 
small file) or is a pointer to another index block (for a large file). 
• Multilevel index. A variant of linked representation uses a first-level index 
block to point to a set of second-level index blocks, which in tum point to 
the file blocks. To access a block, the operating system uses the first-level 
index to find a second-level index block and then uses that block to find the 
desired data block. This approach could be continued to a third or fourth 
level, depending on the desired maximum file size. With 4,096-byte blocks, 
we could store 1,024 four-byte pointers in an index block. Two levels of 
indexes allow 1,048,576 data blocks and a file size of up to 4GB. 
• Combined scheme. Another alternative, used in the UFS, is to keep the 
first, say, 15 pointers of the index block in the file's inode. The first 12 
of these pointers point to direct blocks; that is, they contain addresses of 
blocks that contain data of the file. Thus, the data for small files (of no more 
than 12 blocks) do not need a separate index block. If the block size is 4 KB, 
then up to 48 KB of data can be accessed directly. The next three pointers 
point to indirect blocks. The first points to a single indirect block, which 
is an index block containing not data but the addresses of blocks that do 
contain data. The second points to a double indirect block, which contains 
the address of a block that contains the addresses of blocks that contain 
pointers to the actual data blocks. The last pointer contains the address of a 
triple indirect block. Under this method, the number of blocks that can be 
allocated to a file exceeds the amount of space addressable by the four-byte 
file pointers used by many operating systems. A 32-bit file pointer reaches 
only 232 bytes, or 4GB. Many UNIX implementations, including Solaris and 
IBM's AIX, now support up to 64-bit file pointers. Pointers of this size allow 
files and file systems to be terabytes in size. A UNIX inode is shown in 
Figure 11.9. 
Indexed-allocation schemes suffer from some of the same performance 
problems as does linked allocation. Specifically, the index blocks can be cached 
in memory, but the data blocks may be spread all over a volume. 
11.4.4 Performance 
The allocation methods that we have discussed vary in their storage efficiency 
and data-block access times. Both are important criteria in selecting the proper 
method or methods for an operating system to implement. 

478 
Chapter 11 Implementing File Systems 
Figure 11.9 The UNIX inode. 
Before selecting an allocation method, we need to determine how the 
systems will be used. A system with mostly sequential access should not use 
the same method as a system with mostly random access. 
For any type of access, contiguous allocation requires only one access to get 
a disk block. Since we can easily keep the initial address of the file in memory, 
we can calculate immediately the disk address of the ith block (or the next 
block) and read it directly. 
For linked allocation, we can also keep the address of the next block in 
memory and read it directly. This method is fine for sequential access; for 
direct access, however, an access to the ith block might require i disk reads. This 
problem indicates why linked allocation should not be used for an application 
requiring direct access. 
As a result, some systems support direct-access files by using contiguous 
allocation and sequential-access files by using linked allocation. For these 
systems, the type of access to be made must be declared when the file is 
created. A file created for sequential access will be linked and cannot be used 
for direct access. A file created for direct access will be contiguous and can 
support both direct access and sequential access, but its maximum length must 
be declared when it is created. In this case, the operating system must have 
appropriate data structures and algorithms to support both allocation methods. 
Files can be converted from one type to another by the creation of a new file of 
the desired type, into which the contents of the old file are copied. The old file 
may then be deleted and the new file renamed. 
Indexed allocation is more complex. If the index block is already in memory, 
then the access can be made directly. However, keeping the index block in 
memory requires considerable space. If this memory space is not available, 
then we may have to read first the index block and then the desired data 
block. For a two-level index, two index-block reads might be necessary. For an 

11.5 
11.5 
479 
extremely large file, accessing a block near the end of the file would require 
reading in all the index blocks before the needed data block finally could 
be read. Thus, the performance of indexed allocation depends on the index 
structure, on the size of the file, and on the position of the block desired. 
Some systems combine contiguous allocation with indexed allocation by 
using contiguous allocation for small files (up to three or four blocks) and 
automatically switching to an indexed allocation if the file grows large. Since 
most files are small, and contiguous allocation is efficient for small files, average 
performance can be quite good. 
For instance, the version of the UNIX operating system from Sun Microsys-
tems was changed in 1991 to improve performance in the file-system allocation 
algorithm. The performance measurements indicated that the maximum disk 
throughput on a typical workstation (a 12-MIPS SPARCstation1) took 50 percent 
of the CPU and produced a disk bandwidth of only 1.5 ME per second. To 
improve performance, Sun made changes to allocate space in clusters of 56 KB 
whenever possible (56 KB was the maximum size of a DMA transfer on Sun 
systems at that time). This allocation reduced external fragmentation, and thus 
seek and latency times. In addition, the disk-reading routines were optimized 
to read in these large clusters. The inode structure was left unchanged. As a 
result of these changes, plus the use of read-ahead and free-behind (discussed 
in Section 11.6.2), 25 percent less CPU was used, and throughput substantially 
improved. 
Many other optimizations are in use. Given the disparity between CPU 
speed and disk speed, it is not unreasonable to add thousands of extra 
instructions to the operating system to save just a few disk-head movements. 
Furthermore, this disparity is increasing over time, to the point where hundreds 
of thousands of instructions reasonably could be used to optimize head 
movements. 
Since disk space is limited, we need to reuse the space from deleted files for new 
files, if possible. (Write-once optical disks only allow one write to any given 
sector, and thus such reuse is not physically possible.) To keep track of free disk 
space, the system maintains a 
The free-space list records all free 
disk blocks-those not allocated to some file or directory. To create a file, we 
search the free-space list for the required amount of space and allocate that 
space to the new file. This space is then removed from the free-space list. When 
a file is deleted, its disk space is added to the free-space list. The free-space list, 
despite its name, might not be implemented as a list, as we discuss next. 
11.5.1 Bit Vector 
Frequently, the free-space list is implemented as a 
or 
Each 
block is represented by 1 bit. If the block is free, the bit is 1; if the block is 
allocated, the bit is 0. 
For example, consider a disk where blocks 2, 3, 4, 5, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 17, 
18, 25, 26, and 27 are free and the rest of the blocks are allocated. The free-space 
bit map would be 

480 
Chapter 11 
001111001111110001100000011100000 ... 
The main advantage of this approach is its relative simplicity and its 
efficiency in finding the first free block or n consecutive free blocks on the 
disk. Indeed, many computers supply bit-manipulation instructions that can 
be used effectively for that purpose. For example, the Intel family starting with 
the 80386 and the Motorola family starting with the 68020 have instructions 
that return the offset in a word of the first bit with the value 1 (these processors 
have powered PCs and Macintosh systems, respectively). One technique for 
finding the first free block on a system that uses a bit-vector to allocate disk 
space is to sequentially check each word in the bit map to see whether that 
value is not 0, since a 0-valued word contains only 0 bits and represents a set 
of allocated blocks. The first non-0 word is scanned for the first 1 bit, which is 
the location of the first free block. The calculation of the block number is 
(number of bits per word) x (number of 0-value words) +offset of first 1 bit. 
Again, we see hardware features driving software functionality. Unfor-
tunately, bit vectors are inefficient unless the entire vector is kept in main 
memory (and is written to disk occasionally for recovery needs). Keeping it in 
main memory is possible for smaller disks but not necessarily for larger ones. 
A 1.3-GB disk with 512-byte blocks would need a bit map of over 332 KB to 
track its free blocks, although clustering the blocks in groups of four reduces 
this number to around 83 KB per disk. A 1-TB disk with 4-KB blocks requires 32 
MB to store its bit map. Given that disk size constantly increases, the problem 
with bit vectors will continue to escalate. A 1-PB file system would take a 32-GB 
bitmap just to manage its free space. 
11.5.2 Linked List 
Another approach to free-space management is to link together all the free 
disk blocks, keeping a pointer to the first free block in a special location on the 
disk and caching it in memory. This first block contains a pointer to the next 
free disk block, and so on. Recall our earlier example (Section 11.5.1), in which 
blocks 2, 3, 4, 5, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 17, 18, 25, 26, and 27 were free and the 
rest of the blocks were allocated. In this situation, we would keep a pointer to 
block 2 as the first free block. Block 2 would contain a pointer to block 3, which 
would point to block 4, which would point to block 5, which would point to 
block 8, and so on (Figure 11.10). This scheme is not efficient; to traverse the 
list, we must read each block, which requires substantial I/0 time. Fortunately, 
however, traversing the free list is not a frequent action. Usually, the operating 
system simply needs a free block so that it can allocate that block to a file, so 
the first block in the free list is used. The FAT method incorporates free-block 
accounting into the allocation data structure. No separate method is needed. 
11.5.3 Grouping 
A modification of the free-list approach stores the addresses of n free blocks 
in the first free block. The first n-1 of these blocks are actually free. The last 
block contains the addresses of another n free blocks, and so on. The addresses 

11.5 
481 
Figure 11.10 Linked free-space list on disk. 
of a large number of free blocks can now be found quickly, unlike the situation 
when the standard linked-list approach is used. 
11.5.4 Counting 
Another approach takes advantage of the fact that, generally, several contigu-
ous blocks may be allocated or freed simultaneously, particularly when space is 
allocated with the contiguous-allocation algorithm or through clustering. Thus, 
rather than keeping a list of n free disk addresses, we can keep the address of 
the first free block and the number (n) of free contiguous blocks that follow the 
first block. Each entry in the free-space list then consists of a disk address and 
a count. Although each entry requires more space than would a simple disk 
address, the overall list is shorter, as long as the count is generally greater than 
1. Note that this method of tracking free space is similar to the extent method 
of allocating blocks. These entries can be stored in a B-tree, rather than a linked 
list for efficient lookup, insertion, and deletion. 
11.5.5 Space Maps 
Sun's ZFS file system was designed to encompass huge numbers of files, 
directories, and even file systems (in ZFS, we can create file-system hierarchies). 
The resulting data structures could have been large and inefficient if they had 
not been designed and implemented properly. On these scales, metadata I/0 
can have a large performance impact. Conside1~ for example, that if the free-
space list is implemented as a bit map, bit maps must be modified both when 
blocks are allocated and when they are freed. Freeing 1GB of data on a 1-TB 
disk could cause thousands of blocks of bit maps to be updated, because those 
data blocks could be scattered over the entire disk. 

482 
Chapter 11 
11.6 
ZFS uses a combination of techniques in its free-space managem.ent 
algorithm to control the size of data structures and minimize the I/0 needed 
to manage those structures. First, ZFS creates 
to divide the space 
on the device into chucks of manageable size. A given volume may contain 
hundreds of metaslabs. Each metaslab has an associated space map. ZFS uses 
the counting algorithm to store information about free blocks. Rather than 
write count structures to disk, it uses log-structured file- system techniques 
to record them. The space map is a log of all block activity (allocatil<g and 
freemg), in time order, in countil<g format. When ZFS decides to allocate or 
free space from a metaslab, it loads the associated space map into memory 
in a balanced-tree structure (for very efficient operation), indexed by offset, 
and replays the log into that structure. The in-memory space map is then an 
accurate representation of the allocated and free space in the metaslab. ZFS also 
condenses the map as much as possible by combining contiguous free blocks 
into a sil<gle entry. Finally, the free-space list is updated on disk as part of 
the transaction-oriented operations of ZFS. During the collection and sortmg 
phase, block requests can still occur, and ZFS satisfies these requests from the 
log. In essence, the log plus the balanced tree is the free list. 
Now that we have discussed various block-allocation and directory-
management options, we can further consider their effect on performance 
and efficient disk use. Disks tend to represent a major bottleneck in system 
performance, since they are the slowest main computer component. In this 
section, we discuss a variety of techniques used to improve the efficiency and 
performance of secondary storage. 
11.6.1 
Efficiency 
The efficient use of disk space depends heavily on the disk allocation and 
directory algorithms in use. For instance, UNIX inodes are preallocated on a 
volume. Even an "empty" disk has a percentage of its space lost to inodes. 
However, by preallocating the inodes and spreading them across the volume, 
we improve the file system's performance. This improved performance results 
from the UNIX allocation and free-space algorithms, which try to keep a file's 
data blocks near that file's inode block to reduce seek time. 
As another example, let's reconsider the clustermg scheme discussed in 
Section 11.4, which aids in file-seek and file-transfer performance at the cost 
of internal fragmentation. To reduce this fragmentation, BSD UNIX varies the 
cluster size as a file grows. Large clusters are used where they can be filled, and 
small clusters are used for small files and the last cluster of a file. This system 
is described in Appendix A. 
The types of data normally kept in a file's directory (or inode) entry also 
require consideration. Commonly, a "last write date" is recorded to supply 
information to the user and to determine whether the file needs to be backed 
up. Some systems also keep a "last access date," so that a user can determine 
when the file was last read. The result of keeping this information is that, 
whenever the file is read, a field in the directory structure must be written 

12.1 
The file system can be viewed logically as consisting of three parts. In Chapter 
10, we examined the user and programmer interface to the file system. In 
Chapter 11, we described the internal data structures and algorithms used 
by the operating system to implement this interface. In this chapter, we 
discuss the lowest level of the file system: the secondary and tertiary storage 
structures. We first describe the physical structure of magenetic disks and 
magnetic tapes. We then describe disk-scheduling algorithms, which schedule 
the order of disk I/ Os to improve performance. Next, we discuss disk formatting 
and management of boot blocks, damaged blocks, and swap space. We then 
examine secondary storage structure, covering disk reliability and stable-
storage implementation. We conclude with a brief description of tertiary 
storage devices and the problems that arise when an operating system uses 
tertiary storage. 
To describe the physical structure of secondary and tertiary storage 
devices and its effects on the uses of the devices. 
To explain the performance characteristics of mass-storage devices. 
To discuss operating-system services provided for mass storage, including 
RAID and HSM. 
In this section, we present a general overview of the physical structure of 
secondary and tertiary storage devices. 
12.1.1 
Magnetic Disks 
provide the bulk of secondary storage for modern computer 
systems. Conceptually, disks are relatively simple (Figure 12.1). Each disk 
platter has a flat circular shape, like a CD. Common platter diameters range 
505 

506 
Chapter 12 
arm assembly 
rotation 
Figure 12.1 
Moving-head disk mechanism. 
from 1.8 to 5.25 inches. The two surfaces of a platter are covered with a magnetic 
material. We store information by recording it magnetically on the platters. 
A read -write head "flies" just above each surface of every platter. The 
heads are attached to a 
that moves all the heads as a unit. The surface 
of a platter is logically divided into circular 
which are subdivided into 
The set of tracks that are at one arm position makes up a 
There may be thousands of concentric cylinders in a disk drive, and each track 
may contain hundreds of sectors. The storage capacity of common disk drives 
is measured iil gigabytes. 
When the disk is in use, a drive motor spins it at high speed. Most drives 
rotate 60 to 200 times per second. Disk speed has two parts. The 
is the rate at which data flow between the drive and the computer. The 
sometimes called the 
consists of the 
time necessary to move the disk arm to the desired cylinder, called the 
and the time necessary for the desired sector to rotate to the disk head, 
called the 
Typical disks can transfer several megabytes of 
data per second, and they 
seek times and rotational latencies of several 
milliseconds. 
Because the disk head flies on an extremely thin cushion of air (measured 
in microns), there is a danger that the head will make contact with the disk 
surface. Although the disk platters are coated with a thin protective laye1~ the 
head will sometimes damage the magnetic surface. This accident is called a 
A head crash normally cannot be repaired; the entire disk must be 
replaced. 
A disk can be 
allowing different disks to be mounted as needed. 
Removable magnetic disks generally consist of one platter, held in a plastic case 
to prevent damage while not in the disk drive. 
are inexpensive 
removable magnetic disks that have a soft plastic case containing a flexible 
platter. The head of a floppy-disk drive generally sits directly on the disk 

12.1 
507 
DISK TRANSFER RATES 
As with many aspects of computingf published performance numbers for 
disks are not the same as real-world performance numbers. Stated transfer 
rates are always lower than 
for example. The transfer 
rate may be the rate at which bits can be read from the magnetic media by 
the disk head, but that is different from the rate at which blocks are delivered 
to the operating system. 
surface, so the drive is designed to rotate more slowly than a hard-disk drive 
to reduce the wear on the disk surface. The storage capacity of a floppy disk 
is typically only 1.44MB or so. Removable disks are available that work much 
like normal hard disks and have capacities measured in gigabytes. 
A disk drive is attached to a computer by a set of wires called an 
Several kinds of buses are available, including 
buses. The data transfers on a bus are carried out by special 
electronic processors called 
The 
is the controller at 
the computer end of the bus. A 
is built into each disk drive. To 
perform a disk I/0 operation, the computer places a command into the host 
controller, typically using memory-mapped I/0 portsf as described in Section 
9.7.3. The host controller then sends the command via messages to the disk 
controller, and the disk controller operates the disk-drive hardware to carry 
out the command. Disk controllers usually have a built-in cache. Data transfer 
at the disk drive happens between the cache and the disk surface, and data 
transfer to the host, at fast electronic speeds, occurs between the cache and the 
host controller. 
12.1.2 Magnetic Tapes 
was used as an early secondary-storage medium. Although it 
is relatively permanent and can hold large quantities of dataf its access time 
is slow compared with that of main memory and magnetic disk. In addition, 
random access to magnetic tape is about a thousand times slower than random 
access to magnetic disk, so tapes are not very useful for secondary storage. 
Tapes are used mainly for backup, for storage of infrequently used information, 
and as a medium for transferring information from one system to another. 
A tape is kept in a spool and is wound or rewound past a read-write head. 
Moving to the correct spot on a tape can take minutes, but once positioned, 
tape drives can write data at speeds comparable to disk drives. Tape capacities 
vary greatly, depending on the particular kind of tape drive. Typically, they 
store from 20GB to 200GB. Some have built-in compression that can more than 
double the effective storage. Tapes and their drivers are usually categorized 
by width, includil1.g 4, 8f and 19 millimeters and 1/4 and 1/2 inch. Some are 
named according to technology, such as LT0-2 and SDLT. Tape storage is further 
described in Section 12.9. 

508 
Chapter 12 
12.2 
FIRE WIRE 
refers to an interface designed for connecting peripheral devices 
such as hard drives, DVD drives, and digital video cameras to a computer 
system. Fire Wire was first developed by Apple Computer and became 
the IEEE 1394 standard in 1995. The originaLFireWire standard provided 
bandwidth up to 400 megabits per second. Recently, a new standard-
FireWire 2-has emerged and is identified by the IEEE 1394b standard. 
FireWire 2 provides double the data rate of the original FireWire-800 
megabits per second. 
Modern disk drives are addressed as large one-dimensional arrays of 
where the logical block is the smallest unit of transfer. The size of 
a logical block is usually 512 bytes, although some disks can be 
to have a different logical block size, such as 1,024 bytes. This option 
is described in Section 12.5.1. The one-dimensional array of logical blocks is 
mapped onto the sectors of the disk sequentially. Sector 0 is the first sector 
of the first track on the outermost cylinder. The mapping proceeds in order 
through that track, then through the rest of the tracks in that cylinder, and then 
through the rest of the cylinders from outermost to innermost. 
By using this mapping, we can -at least in theory-convert a logical block 
number into an old-style disk address that consists of a cylinder number, a track 
number within that cylinder, and a sector number within that track. In practice, 
it is difficult to perform this translation, for two reasons. First, most disks have 
some defective sectors, but the mapping hides this by substituting spare sectors 
from elsewhere on the disk. Second, the number of sectors per track is not a 
constant on smne drives. 
Let's look more closely at the second reason. On media that use 
the density of bits per track is uniform. The farther a track 
is from the center of the disk, the greater its length, so the more sectors it can 
hold. As we move from outer zones to inner zones, the number of sectors per 
track decreases. Tracks in the outermost zone typically hold 40 percent more 
sectors than do tracks in the innermost zone. The drive increases its rotation 
speed as the head moves from the outer to the inner tracks to keep the same rate 
of data moving under the head. This method is used in CD-ROM and DVD-ROM 
drives. Alternatively, the disk rotation speed can stay constant; in this case, the 
density of bits decreases from inner tracks to outer tracks to keep the data rate 
constant. This method is used in hard disks and is known as 
The number of sectors per track has been increasing as disk technology 
improves, and the outer zone of a disk usually has several hundred sectors per 
track. Similarly, the number of cylinders per disk has been increasing; large 
disks have tens of thousands of cylinders. 

12.3 
12.3 
509 
Computers access disk storage in two ways. One way is via I/O ports (or 
this is common on small systems. The other way is via 
a remote host in a distributed file system; this is referred to as 
12.3.1 Host-Attached Storage 
Host-attached storage is storage accessed through local I/0 ports. These ports 
use several technologies. The typical desktop PC uses an I/0 bus architecture 
called IDE or ATA. This architecture supports a maximum of two drives per I/0 
bus. A newer, similar protocol that has simplified cabling is SATA. High-end 
workstations and servers generally use more sophisticated I/0 architectures, 
such as SCSI and fiber charmel (FC). 
SCSI is a bus architecture. Its physical medium is usually a ribbon cable with 
a large number of conductors (typically 50 or 68). The SCSI protocol supports a 
maximum of 16 devices per bus. Generally, the devices include one controller 
card in the host (the 
and up to 15 storage devices (the 
to.rgr:::ts). A SCSI disk is a common SCSI target, but the protocol provides the 
ability to address up to 8 
in each SCSI target. A typical use of 
logical unit addressing is to 
commands to components of a RAID array 
or components of a removable media library (such as a CD jukebox sendil<g 
commands to the media-changer mechanism or to one of the drives). 
FC is a high-speed serial architecture that can operate over optical fiber or 
over a four-conductor copper cable. It has two variants. One is a large switched 
fabric having a 24-bit address space. This variant is expected to dominate 
in the future and is the basis of 
(SJld',;s), discussed in 
Section 12.3.3. Because of the large 
space and the switched nature of 
the communication, multiple hosts and storage devices can attach to the fabric, 
allowing great flexibility in I/0 communication. The other FC variant is an 
that can address 126 devices (drives and controllers). 
A wide variety of storage devices are suitable for use as host-attached 
storage. Among these are hard disk drives, RAID arrays, and CD, DVD, and 
tape drives. The I/0 commands that initiate data transfers to a host-attached 
storage device are reads and writes of logical data blocks directed to specifically 
identified storage units (such as bus ID, SCSI ID, and target logical unit). 
12.3.2 Network-Attached Storage 
A network-attached storage (NAS) device is a special-purpose storage system 
that is accessed remotely over a data network (Figure 12.2). Clients access 
network-attached storage via a remote-procedure-call interface such as NFS 
for UNIX systems or CIFS for Windows machines. The remote procedure calls 
(RPCs) are carried via TCP or UDP over an IP network-usually the same 
local-area network (LAN) that carries all data traffic to the clients. The network-
attached storage unit is usually implemented as a RAID array with software that 
implements the RPC interface. It is easiest to thil<k of NAS as simply another 
storage-access protocol. For example, rather than using a SCSI device driver 
and SCSI protocols to access storage, a system using NAS would use RPC over 
TCP /IP. 

510 
Chapter 12 
12.4 
LAN/WAN 
Figure 12.2 Network-attached storage. 
Network-attached storage provides a convenient way for all the computers 
on a LAN to share a pool of storage with the same ease of naming and access 
enjoyed with local host-attached storage. However, it tends to be less efficient 
and have lower performance than some direct-attached storage options. 
is the latest network-attached storage protocol. In essence, it uses the 
IP network protocol to carry the SCSI protocol. Thus, networks-rather than 
SCSI cables-can be used as the interconnects between hosts and their storage. 
As a result, hosts can treat their storage as if it were directly attached, even if 
the storage is distant from the host. 
12.3.3 Storage-Area Network 
One drawback of network-attached storage systems is that the storage I/O 
operations consume bandwidth on the data network, thereby increasing the 
latency of network communication. This problem can be particularly acute 
in large client-server installations-the communication between servers and 
clients competes for bandwidth with the communication among servers and 
storage devices. 
A storage-area network (SAN) is a private network (using storage protocols 
rather than networking protocols) connecting servers and storage units, as 
shown in Figure 12.3. The power of a SAN lies in its flexibility. Multiple hosts 
and multiple storage arrays can attach to the same SAN, and storage can 
be dynamically allocated to hosts. A SAN switch allows or prohibits access 
between the hosts and the storage. As one example, if a host is running low 
on disk space, the SAN can be configured to allocate more storage to that host. 
SANs make it possible for clusters of servers to share the same storage and for 
storage arrays to include multiple direct host com1.ections. SANs typically have 
more ports, and less expensive ports, than storage arrays. 
FC is the most common SAN interconnect, although the simplicity of iSCSI is 
increasing its use. An emerging alternative is a special-purpose bus architecture 
named InfiniBand, which provides hardware and software support for high-
speed interconnection networks for servers and storage units. 
One of the responsibilities of the operating system is to use the hardware 
efficiently. For the disk drives, meeting this responsibility entails having 

12.4 
511 
Figure 12.3 Storage-area network. 
fast access time and large disk bandwidth. The access time has two major 
components (also see Section 12.1.1). The 
is the time for the disk arm 
to move the heads to the cylinder containing the desired sector. The 
is the additional time for the disk to rotate the desired sector to the disk 
head. The disk 
is the total number of bytes transferred, divided 
by the total time between the first request for service and the completion of 
the last transfer. We can improve both the access time and the bandwidth by 
managing the order in which disk I/O requests are serviced. 
Whenever a process needs I/0 to or from the disk, it issues a system call to 
the operating system. The request specifies several pieces of information: 
Whether this operation is input or output 
What the disk address for the transfer is 
What the memory address for the transfer is 
What the number of sectors to be transferred is 
If the desired disk drive and controller are available, the request can be 
serviced immediately. If the drive or controller is busy, any new requests 
for service will be placed in the queue of pending requests for that drive. 
For a multiprogramming system with many processes, the disk queue may 
often have several pending requests. Thus, when one request is completed, the 
operating system chooses which pending request to service next. How does 
the operating system make this choice? Any one of several disk-scheduling 
algorithms can be used, and we discuss them next. 
12.4.1 FCFS Scheduling 
The simplest form of disk scheduling is, of course, the first-come, first-served 
(FCFS) algorithm. This algorithm is intrinsically fair, but it generally does not 
provide the fastest service. Consider, for example, a disk queue with requests 
for I/0 to blocks on cylinders 
98, 183, 37, 122, 14, 124, 65, 67, 

512 
Chapter 12 
queue= 98, 183,37,122, 14,124,65,67 
head starts at 53 
0 14 
37 536567 
98 
122124 
Figure 12.4 FCFS disk scheduling. 
183199 
in that order. If the disk head is initially at cylinder 53, it will first move from 
53 to 98, then to 183, 37, 122, 14, 124, 65, and finally to 67, for a total head 
movement of 640 cylinders. This schedule is diagrammed in Figure 12.4. 
The wild swing from 122 to 14 and then back to 124 illustrates the problem 
with this schedule. If the requests for cylinders 37 and 14 could be serviced 
together, before or after the requests for 122 and 124, the total head movement 
could be decreased substantially, and performance could be thereby improved. 
12.4.2 SSTF Scheduling 
It seems reasonable to service all the requests close to the current head position 
before moving the head far 
to service other 
This assumption is 
the basis for the 
The SSTF algorithm 
selects the request with the least seek time from the current head position. 
Since seek time increases with the number of cylinders traversed by the head, 
SSTF chooses the pending request closest to the current head position. 
For our example request queue, the closest request to the initial head 
position (53) is at cylinder 65. Once we are at cylinder 65, the next closest 
request is at cylinder 67. From there, the request at cylinder 37 is closer than the 
one at 98, so 37 is served next. Continuing, we service the request at cylinder 14, 
then 98, 122, 124, and finally 183 (Figure 12.5). This scheduling method results 
in a total head movement of only 236 cylinders-little more than one-third 
of the distance needed for FCFS scheduling of this request queue. Clearly, this 
algorithm gives a substantial improvement in performance. 
SSTF scheduling is essentially a form of shortest-job-first (SJF) scheduling; 
and like SJF scheduling, it may cause starvation of some requests. Remember 
that requests may arrive at any time. Suppose that we have two requests in 
the queue, for cylinders 14 and 186, and while the request from 14 is being 
serviced, a new request near 14 arrives. This new request will be serviced 
next, making the request at 186 wait. While this request is being serviced, 
another request close to 14 could arrive. In theory, a continual stream of requests 
near one another could cause the request for cylinder 186 to wait indefinitely. 

12.4 
queue= 98, 183, 37, 122, 14, 124, 65, 67 
head starts at 53 
0 14 
37 536567 
98 
122124 
Figure 12.5 SSTF disk scheduling. 
513 
183199 
This scenario becomes increasingly likely as the pending-request queue grows 
longer. 
Although the SSTF algorithm is a substantial improvement over the FCFS 
algorithm, it is not optimal. In the example, we can do better by moving the 
head from 53 to 37, even though the latter is not closest, and then to 14, before 
turning around to service 65, 67, 98, 122, 124, and 183. This strategy reduces 
the total head movement to 208 cylinders. 
12.4.3 SCAN Scheduling 
In the 
toward the 
end, servicing requests as it reaches each cylinder, until it gets 
to the other end of the disk. At the other end, the direction of head movement 
is reversed, and servicing continues. The head continuously scans back and 
forth across the disk. The SCAN algorithm is sometimes called the 
since the disk arm behaves just like an elevator in a building, first 
servicing all the requests going up and then reversing to service requests the 
other way. 
Let's return to our example to illustrate. Before applying SCAN to schedule 
the requests on cylinders 98, 183,37, 122, 14, 124, 65, and 67, we need to know 
the direction of head movement in addition to the head's current position. 
Assuming that the disk arm is moving toward 0 and that the initial head 
position is again 53, the head will next service 37 and then 14. At cylinder 0, 
the arm will reverse and will move toward the other end of the disk, servicil"lg 
the requests at 65, 67, 98, 122, 124, and 183 (Figure 12.6). If a request arrives 
in the queue just in front of the head, it will be serviced almost immediately; a 
request arriving just behind the head will have to wait until the arm moves to 
the end of the disk, reverses direction, and comes back. 
Assuming a uniform distribution of requests for cylinders, consider the 
density of requests when the head reaches one end and reverses direction. At 
this point, relatively few requests are immediately in front of the head, since 
these cylinders have recently been serviced. The heaviest density of requests 

514 
Chapter 12 
queue= 98, 183,37,122, 14,124,65,67 
head starts at 53 
0 14 
37 536567 
98 
122124 
Figure 12.6 SCAN disk scheduling. 
183199 
is at the other end of the disk These requests have also waited the longest so 
why not go there first? That is the idea of the next algorithm. 
12.4.4 C-SCAN Scheduling 
is a variant of SCAN designed to provide 
a more uniform wait time. Like SCAN, C-SCAN moves the head from one end 
of the disk to the other, servicing requests along the way. When the head 
reaches the other end, however, it immediately returns to the beginning of 
the disk without servicing any requests on the return trip (Figure 12.7). The 
C-SCAN scheduling algorithm essentially treats the cylinders as a circular list 
that wraps around from the final cylinder to the first one. 
queue= 98, 183, 37, 122, 14, 124, 65, 67 
head starts at 53 
0 1 4 
37 53 65 67 
98 1 22 1 24 
Figure 12.7 C-SCAN disk scheduling. 
183199 

12.4 
queue = 98, 183, 37, 122, 14, 124, 65, 67 
head starts at 53 
0 14 
37 536567 
98 
122124 
Figure 12.8 C-LOOK disk scheduling. 
12.4.5 LOOK Scheduling 
515 
183199 
As we described themf both SCAN and C-SCAN move the disk arm across the 
full width of the disk In practicef neither algorithm is often implemented this 
way. More commonlyf the arm goes only as far as the final request in each 
direction. Then, it reverses direction immediatelyf without going all the way to 
the end of the disk Versions of SCAN and C-SCAN that follow this pattern are 
called 
and 
because they look for a request before 
continuing to move in a given direction (Figure 12.8). 
12.4.6 Selection of a Disk-Scheduling Algorithm 
Given so many disk-scheduling algorithmsf how do we choose the best one? 
SSTF is common and has a natural appeal because it increases performance over 
FCFS. SCAN and C-SCAN perform better for systems that place a heavy load on 
the diskf because they are less likely to cause a starvation problem. For any 
particular list of requestsf we can define an optimal order of retrievat but the 
computation needed to find an optimal schedule may not justify the savings 
over SSTF or SCAN. With any scheduling algoritlunf howeverf performance 
depends heavily on the number and types of requests. For instance, suppose 
that the queue usually has just one outstanding request. Thenf all scheduling 
algorithms behave the samef because they have only one choice of where to 
move the disk head: they all behave like FCFS scheduling. 
Requests for disk service can be greatly influenced by the file-allocation 
method. A program reading a contiguously allocated file will generate several 
requests that are close together on the disk, resulting in limited head movement. 
A linked or indexed fik in contrastf may include blocks that are widely 
scattered on the diskf resulting in greater head movement. 
The location of directories and index blocks is also important. Since every 
file must be opened to be usedf and opening a file requires searching the 
directory structuref the directories will be accessed frequently. Suppose that a 
directory entry is on the first cylinder and a filef s data are on the final cylinder. In 
this casef the disk head has to move the entire width of the disk If the directory 

516 
Chapter 12 
12.5 
entry were on the middle cylinder, the head would have to move only one-half 
the width. Caching the directories and index blocks in main memory can also 
help to reduce disk-arm movement particularly for read requests. 
Because of these complexities, the disk-scheduling algorithm should be 
written as a separate module of the operating system, so that it can be replaced 
with a different algorithm if necessary. Either SSTF or LOOK is a reasonable 
choice for the default algorithm. 
The scheduling algorithms described here consider only the seek distances. 
For modern disks, the rotational latency can be nearly as large as the 
average seek time. It is difficult for the operating system to schedule for 
improved rotational latency, though, because modern disks do not disclose the 
physical location of logical blocks. Disk manufacturers have been alleviating 
this problem by implementing disk-scheduling algorithms in the controller 
hardware built into the disk drive. If the operating system sends a batch of 
requests to the controller, the controller can queue them and then schedule 
them to improve both the seek time and the rotational latency. 
If I/O performance were the only consideration, the operating system 
would gladly turn over the responsibility of disk scheduling to the disk hard-
ware. In practice, however, the operating system may have other constraints on 
the service order for requests. For instance, demand paging may take priority 
over application I/0, and writes are more urgent than reads if the cache is 
running out of free pages. Also, it may be desirable to guarantee the order of a 
set of disk writes to make the file system robust in the face of system crashes. 
Consider what could happen if the operating system allocated a disk page to a 
file and the application wrote data into that page before the operating system 
had a chance to flush the modified inode and free-space list back to disk. To 
accommodate such requirements, an operating system may choose to do its 
own disk scheduling and to spoon-feed the requests to the disk controller, one 
by one, for some types of I/0. 
The operating system is responsible for several other aspects of disk manage-
ment, too. Here we discuss disk initialization, booting from disk, and bad-block 
recovery. 
12.5.1 Disk Formatting 
A new magnetic disk is a blank slate: it is just a platter of a magnetic recording 
material. Before a disk can store data, it must be divided into sectors that the 
disk controller can read and write. This process is called 
or 
Low-level formatting fills the disk with a special data 
structure for each sector. The data structure for a sector typically consists of a 
header, a data area (usually 512 bytes in size), and a trailer. The header and 
trailer contain information used by the disk controller, such as a sector number 
and an 
. When the controller writes a sector of data 
during normal I/0, the ECC is updated with a value calculated from all the bytes 
in the data area. When the sector is read, the ECC is recalculated and compared 
with the stored value. If the stored and calculated numbers are different, this 

12.5 
517 
mismatch indicates that the data area of the sector has become corrupted and 
that the disk sector may be bad (Section 12.5.3). The ECC is an error-correcting 
code because it contains enough information, if only a few bits of data have 
been corrupted, to enable the controller to identify which bits have changed 
and calculate what their correct values should be. It then reports a recoverable 
. The controller automatically does the ECC processing whenever a 
sector is read or written. 
Most hard disks are low-level-formatted at the factory as a part of the 
manufacturing process. This formatting enables the manufacturer to test the 
disk and to initialize the mapping from logical block numbers to defect-free 
sectors on the disk. For many hard disks, when the disk controller is instructed 
to low-level-format the disk, it can also be told how many bytes of data space 
to leave between the header and trailer of all sectors. It is usually possible to 
choose among a few sizes, such as 256,512, and 1,024 bytes. Formatting a disk 
with a larger sector size means that fewer sectors can fit on each track; but it 
also means that fewer headers and trailers are written on each track and more 
space is available for user data. Some operating systems can handle only a 
sector size of 512 bytes. 
Before it can use a disk to hold files, the operating system still needs to 
record its own data structures on the disk. It does so in two steps. The first step 
is to 
the disk into one or more groups of cylinders. The operatiltg 
system can treat each partition as though it were a separate disk. For instance, 
one partition can hold a copy of the operating system's executable code, while 
another holds user files. The second step is icgicz;i 
or creation of a 
file system. In this step, the operating system stores the iltitial file-system data 
structures onto the disk. These data structures may include maps of free and 
allocated space (a FAT or inodes) and an initial empty directory. 
To increase efficiency, most file systems group blocks together into larger 
chunks, frequently called 
Disk I/0 is done via blocks, but file system 
II 0 is done via clusters, effectively assuring that II 0 has more sequential-access 
and fewer random-access characteristics. 
Some operating systems give special programs the ability to use a disk 
partition as a large sequential array of logical blocks, without any file-system 
data structures. This array is sometimes called the raw disk, and II 0 to this array 
is termed raw l/0. For example, some database systems prefer raw IIO because 
it enables them to control the exact disk location where each database record is 
stored. Raw l/0 bypasses all the file-system services, such as the buffer cache, 
file locking, prefetching, space allocation, file names, and directories. We can 
make certain applications more efficient by allowing them to implement their 
own special-purpose storage services on a raw partition, but most applications 
perform better when they use the regular file-system services. 
12.5.2 Boot Block 
For a computer to start running-for instance, when it is powered up 
or rebooted -it must have an initial program to run. This initial bootstrap 
program tends to be simple. It initializes all aspects of the system, from CPU 
registers to device controllers and the contents of main memory, and then 
starts the operating system. To do its job, the bootstrap program finds the 

518 
Chapter 12 
operating-system kernel on disk, loads that kernel into memory, and jumps to 
an initial address to begin the operating-system execution. 
For most computers, the bootstrap is stored in 
This location is convenient, because ROM needs no initialization and is at a fixed 
location that the processor can start executing when powered up or reset. And, 
since ROM is read only, it cannot be infected by a computer virus. The problem is 
that changing this bootstrap code requires changing the ROM hardware chips. 
For this reason, most systems store a tiny bootstrap loader program in the boot 
ROM whose only job is to bring in a full bootstrap program from disk. The full 
bootstrap program can be changed easily: a new version is simply written onto 
the disk. The full bootstrap program is stored in the "boot blocks" at a fixed 
location on the disk. A disk that has a boot partition is called a 
or 
The code in the boot ROM instructs the disk controller to read the boot 
blocks into memory (no device drivers are loaded at this point) and then starts 
executing that code. The full bootstrap program is more sophisticated than the 
bootstrap loader in the boot ROM; it is able to load the entire operating system 
from a non-fixed location on disk and to start the operating system ruru1ing. 
Even so, the full bootstrap code may be small. 
Let's consider as an example the boot process in Windows 2000. The 
Windows 2000 system places its boot code in the first sector on the hard disk 
(which it terms the 
or 
Furthermore, Windows 2000 
allows a hard disk to be divided into one or more partitions; one partition, 
identified as the 
contains the operating system and device 
drivers. Bootil1g begins in a Windows 2000 system by running code that is 
resident in the system's ROM memory. This code directs the system to read 
the boot code from the MBR. In addition to containing boot code, the MBR 
contains a table listing the partitions for the hard disk and a flag indicating 
which partition the system is to be booted from, as illustrated in Figure 12.9. 
Once the system identifies the boot partition, it reads the first sector from that 
partition (which is called the 
and contilmes with the remainder of 
the boot process, which includes loading the various subsystems and system 
services. 
MBR 
partition 1 
partition 2 
partition 3 
partition 4 
boot 
code 
partition 
table 
boot partition 
Figure 12.9 Booting from disk in Windows 2000. 

12.5 
519 
12.5.3 Bad Blocks 
Because disks have moving parts and small tolerances (recall that the disk 
head flies just above the disk surface), they are prone to failure. Sometimes the 
failure is complete; in this case, the disk needs to be replaced and its contents 
restored from backup media to the new disk. More frequently, one or more 
sectors become defective. Most disks even con'le from the factory with 
Depending on the disk and controller in use, these blocks are handled 
in a variety of ways. 
On simple disks, such as some disks with IDE controllers, bad blocks are 
handled manually. For instance, the MS-DOS format command performs logical 
formatting and, as a part of the process, scans the disk to find bad blocks. If 
format finds a bad block, it writes a special value into the corresponding FAT 
entry to tell the allocation routines not to use that block. If blocks go bad during 
normal operation, a special program (such as chkdsk) must be run manually 
to search for the bad blocks and to lock them away. Data that resided on the 
bad blocks usually are lost. 
More sophisticated disks, such as the SCSI disks used in high-end PCs 
and most workstations and servers, are smarter about bad-block recovery. The 
controller maintains a list of bad blocks on the disk. The list is initialized during 
the low-level formatting at the factory and is updated over the life of the disk. 
Low-level formatting also sets aside spare sectors not visible to the operating 
system. The controller can be told to replace each bad sector logically with one 
of the spare sectors. This scheme is known as 
or 
A typical bad-sector transaction might be as follows: 
The operating system tries to read logical block 87. 
The controller calculates the ECC and finds that the sector is bad. It reports 
this finding to the operating system. 
The next time the system is rebooted, a special command is run to tell the 
SCSI controller to replace the bad sector with a spare. 
After that, whenever the system requests logical block 87, the request is 
translated into the replacement sector's address by the controller. 
Note that such a redirection by the controller could invalidate any opti-
mization by the operating system's disk-scheduling algorithm! For this reason, 
most disks are formatted to provide a few spare sectors in each cylinder and 
a spare cylinder as well. When a bad block is remapped, the controller uses a 
spare sector from the same cylinder, if possible. 
As an alternative to sector 
some controllers can be instructed to 
replace a bad block by 
Here is an example: Suppose that 
logical block 17 becomes defective and the first available spare follows sector 
202. Then, sector slipping remaps all the sectors front 17 to 202, moving them 
all down one spot. That is, sector 202 is copied into the spare, then sector 201 
into 202, then 200 into 201, and so on, until sector 18 is copied into sector 19. 
Slipping the sectors in this way frees up the space of sector 18, so sector 17 can 
be mapped to it. 
The replacement of a bad block generally is not totally automatic because 
the data in the bad block are usually lost. Soft errors may trigger a process in 

520 
Chapter 12 
12.6 
which a copy of the block data is made and the block is spared or slipped. 
An unrecoverable 
howeverf results in lost data. Whatever file was 
using th.at block must be repaired (for instancef by restoration from a backup 
tape)f and that requires manual intervention. 
Swapping was first presented in Section 8.2f where we discussed moving 
entire processes between disk and main memory. Swapping in that setting 
occurs when the amount of physical memory reaches a critically low point and 
processes are moved from memory to swap space to free available memory. 
In practicef very few modern operating systems implement swapping in 
this fashion. Rathel~ systems now combine swapping with virtual memory 
techniques (Chapter 9) and swap pagesf not necessarily entire processes. In 
fact some systems now use the terms swapping and paging interchangeablyf 
reflecting the merging of these two concepts. 
is another low-level task of the operating 
system. Virtual memory uses disk space as an extension of main memory. 
Since disk access is much slower than memory accessf using swap space 
significantly decreases system performance. The main goal for the design and 
implementation of swap space is to provide the best throughput for the virtual 
memory system. In this sectionf we discuss how swap space is usedf where 
swap space is located on diskf and how swap space is managed. 
12.6.1 Swap-Space Use 
Swap space is used in various ways by different operating systemsf depending 
on the memory-management algorithms in use. For instancef systems that 
implement swapping may use swap space to hold an entire process imagef 
including the code and data segments. Paging systems may simply store pages 
that have been pushed out of main memory. The amount of swap space needed 
on a system can therefore vary from a few megabytes of disk space to gigabytesf 
depending on the amow1.t of physical memoryf the amount of virtual memory 
it is backingf and the way in which the virtual memory is used. 
Note that it may be safer to overestimate than to underestimate the amount 
of swap space requiredf because if a system runs out of swap space it may be 
forced to abort processes or may crash entirely. Overestimation wastes disk 
space that could otherwise be used for filesf but it does no other harm. Some 
systems recommend the amount to be set aside for swap space. Solarisf for 
examplef suggests setting swap space equal to the amount by which virtual 
memory exceeds pageable physical memory. In the past Linux has suggested 
setting swap space to double the amount of physical memoryf although most 
Linux systems now use considerably less swap space. In factf there is currently 
much debate in the Linux community about whether to set aside swap space 
at all! 
Some operating systems-including Linux-allow the use of multiple 
swap spaces. These swap spaces are usually put on separate disks so that the 
load placed on the I/0 system. by paging and swapping can be spread over the 
systemfs I/O devices. 

14.1 
CHAPTER 
The processes in an operating system must be protected from one another's 
activities. To provide such protection, we can use various mechanisms to ensure 
that only processes that have gained proper authorization from the operating 
system can operate on the files, memory segments, CPU, and other resources 
of a system. 
Protection refers to a mechanism for controlling the access of programs, 
processes, or users to the resources defined by a computer system. This 
mechanism must provide a means for specifying the controls to be imposed, 
together with a means of enforcement. We distinguish between protection and 
security, which is a measure of confidence that the integrity of a system and 
its data will be preserved. In this chapter, we focus on protection. Security 
assurance is a much broader topic, and we address it in Chapter 15. 
To discuss the goals and principles of protection in a modern computer 
system. 
" To explain how protection domains, combined with an access matrix, are 
used to specify the resources a process may access. 
To examine capability- and language-based protection systems. 
As computer systems have become more sophisticated and pervasive in their 
applications, the need to protect their integrity has also grown. Protection was 
originally conceived as an adjunct to multiprogramming operating systems, 
so that untrustworthy users might safely share a common logical name space, 
such as a directory of files, or share a common physical name space, such as 
memory. Modern protection concepts have evolved to increase the reliability 
of any complex system that makes use of shared resources. 
We need to provide protection for several reasons. The most obvious is the 
need to prevent the mischievous, intentional violation of an access restriction 
591 

592 
Chapter 14 
14.2 
by a user. Of more general importance, however, is the need to ensure that 
each program component active in a system uses system resources only in 
ways consistent with stated policies. This requirement is an absolute one for a 
reliable system. 
Protection can improve reliability by detecting latent errors at the interfaces 
between component subsystems. Early detection of interface errors can often 
prevent contamination of a healthy subsystem by a malfunctioning subsystem. 
Also, an unprotected resource cannot defend against use (or misuse) by an 
unauthorized or incompetent user. A protection-oriented system provides 
means to distinguish between authorized and unauthorized usage. 
The role of protection in a computer system is to provide a mechanism for 
the enforcement of the policies governing resource use. These policies can be 
established in a variety of ways. Some are fixed in the design of the system, 
while others are formulated by the management of a system. Still others are 
defined by the individual users to protect their own files and programs. A 
protection system must have the flexibility to enforce a variety of policies. 
Policies for resource use may vary by application, and they may change 
over time. For these reasons, protection is no longer the concern solely of 
the designer of an operating system. The application programmer needs to 
use protection mechanisms as well, to guard resources created and supported 
by an application subsystem against misuse. In this chapter, we describe the 
protection mechanisms the operating system should provide, but application 
designers can use them as well in designing their own protection software. 
Note that mechanisms are distinct from policies. Mechanisms determine how 
something will be done; policies decide what will be done. The separation 
of policy and mechanism is important for flexibility. Policies are likely to 
change from place to place or time to time. In the worst case, every change 
in policy would require a change in the underlying mechanism. Using general 
mechanisms enables us to avoid such a situation. 
Frequently, a guiding principle can be used throughout a project, such as 
the design of an operating system. Following this principle simplifies design 
decisions and keeps the system consistent and easy to understand. A key, 
time-tested guiding principle for protection is the 
It 
dictates that programs, users, and even systems be given just enough privileges 
to perform their tasks. 
Consider the analogy of a security guard with a passkey. If this key allows 
the guard into just the public areas that she guards, then misuse of the key 
will result in minimal damage. If, however, the passkey allows access to all 
areas, then damage from its being lost, stolen, misused, copied, or otherwise 
compromised will be much greater. 
An operating system following the principle of least privilege implements 
its features, programs, system calls, and data structures so that failure or 
compromise of a component does the minimum damage and allows the 
n1inimum damage to be done. The overflow of a buffer in a system daemon 
might cause the daemon process to fail, for example, but should not allow the 
execution of code from the daemon process's stack that would enable a remote 

14.3 
14.3 
593 
user to gain maximum privileges and access to the entire system (as happens 
too often today). 
Such an operating system also provides system calls and services that 
allow applications to be written with fine-grained access controls. It provides 
mechanisms to enable privileges when they are needed and to disable them 
when they are not needed. Also beneficial is the creation of audit trails for 
all privileged function access. The audit trail allows the prograrnmer, systems 
administrator, or law-enforcement officer to trace all protection and security 
activities on the system. 
Managing users with the principle of least privilege entails creating a 
separate account for each user, with just the privileges that the user needs. An 
operator who needs to mount tapes and back up files on the system has access 
to just those commands and files needed to accomplish the job. Some systems 
implement role-based access control (RBAC) to provide this functionality. 
Computers implemented in a computing facility under the principle of least 
privilege can be limited to running specific services, accessing specific remote 
hosts via specific services, and doing so during specific times. Typically, these 
restrictions are implemented through enabling or disabling each service and 
through using access control lists, as described in Sections 10.6.2 and 14.6. 
The principle of least privilege can help produce a more secure computing 
environment. Unfortunately, it frequently does not. For example, Windows 
2000 has a complex protection scheme at its core and yet has many security 
holes. By comparison, Solaris is considered relatively secure, even though it 
is a variant of UNIX, which historically was designed with little protection 
in mind. One reason for the difference may be that Windows 2000 has more 
lines of code and more services than Solaris and thus has more to secure and 
protect. Another reason could be that the protection scheme in Windows 2000 
is irtcomplete or protects the wrong aspects of the operating system, leaving 
other areas vulnerable. 
A computer system is a collection of processes and objects. By objects, we mean 
both 
(such as the CPU, memory segments, printers, disks, and 
tape drives) and 
(such as files, programs, and semaphores). 
Each object has a unique name that differentiates it from all other objects in the 
system, and each can be accessed only through well-defined and meaningful 
operations. Objects are essentially abstract data types. 
The operations that are possible may depend on the object. For example, 
on a CPU, we can only execute. Memory segments can be read and written, 
whereas a CD-ROM or DVD-ROM can only be read. Tape drives can be read, 
written, and rewound. Data files can be created, opened, read, written, closed, 
and deleted; program files can be read, written, executed, and deleted. 
A process should be allowed to access only those resources for which it 
has authorization. Furthermore, at any time, a process should be able to access 
only those reso1Jrces that it currently reqLlires to complete its task. This second 
requirement, conunonly referred to as the need-to-know principle, is useful in 
limiting the amount of damage a faulty process can cause in the system. For 
example, when process p invokes procedure A(), the procedure should be 

594 
Chapter14 
allowed to access only its own variables and the formal parameters passed 
to it; it should not be able to access all the variables of process p. Similarly, 
consider the case in which process p invokes a compiler to compile a particular 
file. The compiler should not be able to access files arbitrarily but should have 
access only to a well-defined subset of files (such as the source file, listing file, 
and so on) related to the file to be compiled. Conversely, the compiler may have 
private files used for accounting or optimization purposes that process p should 
not be able to access. The need-to-know principle is similar to the principle of 
least privilege discussed in Section 14.2 in that the goals of protection are to 
minimize the risks of possible security violations. 
14.3.1 Domain Structure 
To facilitate the scheme just described, a process operates within a 
which specifies the resources that the process may access. Each 
domain defines a set of objects and the types of operations that may be invoked 
on each object. The ability to execute an operation on an object is an 
A domain is a collection of access rights, each of which is an ordered pair 
<object-name, rights-set>. For example, if domain D has the access right <file F, 
{read, write}>, then a process executing in domain D can both read and write 
file F; it cannot, however, perform any other operation on that object. 
Domains do not need to be disjoint; they may share access rights. For 
example, in Figure 14.1, we have three domains: D1, D2, and D3. The access 
right < 0 4, {print}> is shared by D2 and D3, implying that a process executing 
in either of these two domains can print object 0 4. Note that a process must be 
executing in domain D1 to read and write object 0 1, while only processes in 
domain D3 may execute object 0 1. 
The association between a process and a domain may be either 
if 
the set of resources available to the process is fixed throughout the process's 
lifetime, or 
As might be expected, establishing dynamic protection 
domains is more complicated than establishing static protection domains. 
If the association between processes and domains is fixed, and we want to 
adhere to the need-to-know principle, then a mechanism must be available to 
change the content of a domain. The reason stems from the fact that a process 
may execute in two different phases and may, for example, need read access 
in one phase and write access in another. If a domain is static, we must define 
the domain to include both read and write access. However, this arrangement 
provides more rights than are needed in each of the two phases, since we have 
read access in the phase where we need only write access, and vice versa. 
Thus, the need-to-know principle is violated. We must allow the contents of 
< 0 3, {read, write} > 
< 0 1,.{read, write}> 
< 0 2 , {execute} > 
< 0 2, {write}> 
<•01, {execute}> 
< 0 3, {read}> 
Figure 14.1 
System with three protection domains. 

14.3 
595 
a domain to be modified so that the domain always reflects the n1inimum 
necessary access rights. 
If the association is dynamic, a mechanism is available to allow 
enabling the process to switch from one domain to another. We may 
also want to allow the content of a domain to be changed. If we cannot change 
the content of a domain, we can provide the same effect by creating a new 
domain with the changed content and switching to that new domain when we 
want to change the domain content. 
A domain can be realized in a variety of ways: 
Each user may be a domain. In this case, the set of objects that can be 
accessed depends on the identity of the user. Domain switching occurs 
when the user is changed -generally when one user logs out and another 
user logs in. 
Each process may be a domain. In this case, the set of objects that can be 
accessed depends on the identity of the process. Domain switching occurs 
when one process sends a message to another process and then waits for 
a response. 
Each procedure may be a domain. In this case, the set of objects that can be 
accessed corresponds to the local variables defined within the procedure. 
Domain switching occurs when a procedure call is made. 
We discuss domain switching in greater detail in Section 14.4. 
Consider the standard dual-mode (monitor-user mode) model of 
operating-system execution. When a process executes in monitor mode, it 
can execute privileged instructions and thus gain complete control of the 
computer system. In contrast, when a process executes in user mode, it can 
invoke only nonprivileged instructions. Consequently, it can execute only 
within its predefined memory space. These two modes protect the operating 
system (executing in monitor domain) from the user processes (executing 
in user domain). In a multiprogrammed operating system, two protection 
domains are insufficient, since users also want to be protected from one 
another. Therefore, a more elaborate scheme is needed. We illustrate such a 
scheme by examining two influential operating systems-UNIX and MULTICS 
-to see how they implement these concepts. 
14.3.2 An Example: UNIX 
In the UNIX operating system, a domain is associated with the user. Switching 
the domain corresponds to changing the user identification temporarily. 
This change is accomplished tbough the file system as follows. An owner 
identification and a domain bit (known as the setuid bit) are associated with 
each file. When the setuid bit is on, and a user executes that file, the user ID is 
set to that of the owner of the file; when the bit is off, however, the user ID does 
not change. For example, when a user A (that is, a user with useriD =A) starts 
executing a file owned by B, whose associated domain bit is off, the useriD of 
the process is set to A. When the setuid bit is on, the useriD is set to that of 
the owner of the file: B. When the process exits, this temporary useriD change 
ends. 

596 
Chapter 14 
Other methods are used to change domains in operating systems in which 
user IDs are used for domain definition, because almost all systems need 
to provide such a mechanism. This mechanism is used when an otherwise 
privileged facility needs to be made available to the general user population. 
For instance, it might be desirable to allow users to access a network without 
letting them write their own networking programs. In such a case, on a UNIX 
system, the setuid bit on a networking program. would be set, causing the user 
lD to change when the program was run. The user lD would change to that 
of a user with network access privilege (such as root, the most powerful user 
ID). One problem with this method is that if a user manages to create a file 
with user ID root and with its setuid bit on, that user can become root and do 
anything and everything on the system. The setuid mechanism is discussed 
further in Appendix A. 
An alternative to this method used in other operating systems is to place 
privileged programs in a special directory. The operating system would be 
designed to change the user lD of any program run from this directory, either 
to the equivalent of root or to the user lD of the owner of the directory. This 
eliminates one security problem with setuid programs in which crackers create 
and hide such programs for later use (using obscure file or directory names). 
This method is less flexible than that used in UNIX, however. 
Even more restrictive, and thus more protective, are systems that simply 
do not allow a change of user ID. In these instances, special techniques must 
be used to allow users access to privileged facilities. For instance, a 
may be started at boot time and run as a special user ID. Users then 
run a separate program, which sends requests to this process whenever they 
need to use the facility. This method is used by the TOPS-20 operating system. 
In any of these systems, great care must be taken in writing privileged 
programs. Any oversight can result in a total lack of protection on the system. 
Generally, these programs are the first to be attacked by people trying to 
break into a system; unfortunately, the attackers are frequently successful. 
For example, security has been breached on many UNIX systems because of the 
setuid feature. We discuss security in Chapter 15. 
14.3.3 An Example: MUL TICS 
In the MULTICS system, the protection domains are organized hierarchically 
into a ring structure. Each ring corresponds to a single domain (Figure 14.2). 
The rings are numbered from 0 to 7. Let D; and Dj be any two domain rings. 
If j < i, then D; is a subset of Dj- That is, a process executing in domain Dj 
has more privileges than does a process executing in domain D;. A process 
executing in domain Do has the most privileges. If only two rings exist, this 
scheme is equivalent to the monitor-user n1ode of execution, where monitor 
mode corresponds to Do and user mode corresponds to D1. 
MULTICS has a segmented address space; each segment is a file, and each 
segment is associated with one of the rings. A segm.ent description includes an 
entry that identifies the ring number. In addition, it includes three access bits 
to control reading, writing, and execution. The association between segments 
and rings is a policy decision with which we are not concerned here. 
A current-ring-number counter is associated with each process, identifying 
the ring in which the process is executing currently. When a process is executing 

14.3 
597 
Figure 14.2 MULTICS ring structure. 
in ring i, it cmmot access a segment associated with ring j (j < i). It can access a 
segment associated with ring k (k::: i). The type of access, however, is restricted 
according to the access bits associated with that segment. 
Domain switching in MULTICS occurs when a process crosses from one ring 
to another by calling a procedure in a different ring. Obviously, this switch must 
be done in a controlled mmmer; otherwise, a process could start executing in 
ring 0, and no protection would be provided. To allow controlled domain 
switching, we modify the ring field of the segment descriptor to include the 
following: 
Access bracket. A pair of integers, bl and b2, such that bl ::=: b2. 
Limit. An integer b3 such that b3 > b2. 
List of gates. Identifies the entry points (or 
may be called. 
at which the segments 
If a process executing in ring i calls a procedure (or segncent) with access bracket 
(bl,b2), then the call is allowed if bl ::=: i ::=: b2, and the current ring number of 
the process remains i. Otherwise, a trap to the operating system occurs, and 
the situation is handled as follows: 
If i < bl, then the call is allowed to occur, because we have a transfer to a 
ring (or domain) with fewer privileges. However, if parameters are passed 
that refer to segments in a lower ring (that is, segments not accessible to 
the called procedure), then these segments must be copied into an area 
that can be accessed by the called procedure. 
If i > b2, then the call is allowed to occur only if b3 is greater than or equal 
to i and the call has been directed to one of the designated entry points in 
the list of gates. This scheme allows processes with limited access rights to 
call procedures in lower rings that have more access rights, but only in a 
carefully controlled mmmer. 

598 
Chapter 14 
14.4 
The main disadvantage of the ring (or hierarchical) structure is that it does 
not allow us to enforce the need-to-know principle. In particular, if an object 
must be accessible in domain 0 J but not accessible in domain Oi, then we must 
have j < i. But this requirement means that every segment accessible in Oi is 
also accessible in 0 1. 
The MULTICS protection system is generally more complex and less efficient 
than are those used in current operating systems. If protection interferes with 
the ease of use of the system or significantly decreases system performance, 
then its use must be weighed carefully against the purpose of the system. For 
instance, we would want to have a complex protection system on a computer 
used by a university to process students' grades and also used by students for 
classwork. A similar protection system would not be suited to a computer being 
used for number crunching, in which performance is of utmost importance. We 
would prefer to separate the mechanism from the protection policy, allowing 
the same system to have complex or simple protection depending on the needs 
of its users. To separate mechanism from policy, we require a more general 
model of protection. 
Our model of protection can be viewed abstractly as a matrix, called an 
The rows of the access matrix represent domains, and the columns 
represent objects. Each entry in the matrix consists of a set of access rights. 
Because the column defines objects explicitly, we can omit the object name 
from the access right. The entry access(i,j) defines the set of operations that a 
process executing in domain Oi can invoke on object OJ. 
To illustrate these concepts, we consider the access matrix shown in Figure 
14.3. There are four domains and four objects-three files (F1, F2, F3) and one 
laser printer. A process executing in domain 0 1 can read files F1 and F3 . A 
process executing in domain 0 4 has the same privileges as one executing in 
domain 0 1; but in addition, it can also write onto files F1 and F3 . Note that the 
laser printer can be accessed only by a process executing in domain 0 2. 
The access-matrix scheme provides us with the mechanism for specifying 
a variety of policies. The mechanism consists of implementing the access 
01 
read 
read 
02 
print 
03 
read 
execute 
04 
read 
read 
write 
write 
Figure 14.3 Access matrix. 

14.4 
599 
matrix and ensuring that the semantic properties we have outlined hold. 
More specifically, we must ensure that a process executing in domain n can 
access only those objects specified in row ( and then only as allowed by the 
access-matrix entries. 
The access matrix can implement policy decisions concerning protection. 
The policy decisions involve which rights should be included in the (i,j)th 
entry. We must also decide the domain in which each process executes. This 
last policy is usually decided by the operating system. 
The users normally decide the contents of the access-matrix entries. When 
a user creates a new object Oi, the column Oi is added to the access matrix 
with the appropriate initialization entries, as dictated by the creator. The user 
may decide to enter some rights in some entries in cohum1 j and other rights 
in other entries, as needed. 
The access matrix provides an appropriate mechanism for defining and 
implementing strict control for both the static and dynamic association between 
processes and domains. When we switch a process from one domain to another, 
we are executing an operation (switch) on an object (the domain). We can 
control domain switching by including domains among the objects of the 
access matrix. Similarly, when we change the content of the access matrix, 
we are performing an operation on an object: the access matrix. Again, we 
can control these changes by including the access matrix itself as an object. 
Actually, since each entry in the access matrix may be modified individually, 
we must consider each entry in the access matrix as an object to be protected. 
Now, we need to consider only the operations possible on these new objects 
(domains and the access matrix) and decide how we want processes to be able 
to execute these operations. 
Processes should be able to switch from one domain to another. Switching 
from domain D; to domain Di is allowed if and only if the access right switch 
E access(i,j). Thus, in Figure 14.4, a process executing in domain D2 can switch 
to domain D3 or to domain D4. A process in domain D4 can switch to D1, and 
one in domain D1 can switch to D2-
Allowing controlled change in the contents of the access-matrix entries 
requires three additional operations: copy, owner, and control. We examine 
these operations next. 
01 
read 
read 
switch 
02 
print 
switch switch 
03 
read 
execute 
04 
read 
read 
switch 
write 
write 
Figure 14.4 Access matrix of Figure 14.3 with domains as objects. 

600 
Chapter 14 
(a) 
execute 
read* 
execute 
execute 
read 
(b) 
Figure 14.5 Access matrix with copy rights. 
The ability to copy an access right from one domain (or row) of the access 
matrix to another is denoted by an asterisk (*) appended to the access right. 
The copy right allows the access right to be copied only within the colurrm. 
(that is, for the object) for which the right is defined. For example, in Figure 
14.5(a), a process executing in domain D2 can copy the read operation into any 
entry associated with file F2 . Hence, the access matrix of Figure 14.5(a) can be 
modified to the access matrix shown in Figure 14.5(b ). 
This scheme has two variants: 
A right is copied from access(i, j) to access(Jc, j); it is then removed from 
access(i, j). This action is a transfer of a right, rather than a copy. 
Propagation of the copy right may be limited. That is, when the right 
R* is copied from access(i,j) to access(lc,j), only the right R (not R*) 
is created. A process executing in domain D~r cannot further copy the 
right R. 
A system may select only one of these three copy rights, or it may provide all 
three by identifying them as separate rights: copy, transfer, and limited copy. 
We also need a mechanism to allow addition of new rights and removal of 
some rights. The owner right controls these operations. If access(i, j) includes 
the owner right, then a process executing in domain Di can add and remove 
any right in any entry in column j. For example, in Figure 14.6(a), domain D1 
is the owner of F1 and thus can add and delete any valid right in column F1. 
Similarly, domain D2 is the owner of F2 and F3 and thus can add and remove 
any valid right within these two columns. Thus, the access matrix of Figure 
14.6(a) can be modified to the access matrix shown in Figure 14.6(b). 

14.4 
601 
01 
owner 
write 
execute 
read* 
read* 
02 
owner 
owner 
write 
03 
execute 
(a) 
01 
owner 
write 
execute 
owner 
read* 
02 
read* 
owner 
write* 
write 
03 
write 
write 
(b) 
Figure 14.6 Access matrix with owner rights. 
The copy and owner rights allow a process to change the entries in a column. 
A mechanism is also needed to change the entries in a row. The control right 
is applicable only to domain objects. If access(i, j) includes the control right, 
then a process executing in domain Di can remove any access right from 
row j. For example, suppose that, in Figure 14.4, we include the control right in 
access(D2, D4). Then, a process executil1.g in domain D2 could modify domai11 
D4, as shown in Figure 14.7. 
read 
read 
switch 
print 
switch switch 
control 
read 
execute 
write 
write 
switch 
Figure 14.7 Modified access matrix of Figure 14.4. 

602 
Chapter 14 
14.5 
The copy and owner rights provide us with a mechanism to limit the 
propagation of access rights. However, they do not give us the appropriate tools 
for preventing the propagation (or disclosure) of information. The problem. of 
guaranteeing that no information initially held in an object can migrate outside 
of its execution environment is called the 
. This problem 
is in general unsolvable (see the bibliographical notes at the end of the chapter). 
These operations on the domains and the access matrix are not in them-
selves important, but they illustrate the ability of the access-matrix model to 
allow the implementation and control of dynamic protection requirements. 
New objects and new domains can be created dynamically and included in the 
access-matrix model. However, we have shown only that the basic mechanism 
exists; system designers and users must make the policy decisions concerning 
which domains are to have access to which objects in which ways. 
How can the access matrix be implemented effectively? In general, the matrix 
will be sparse; that is, most of the entries will be empty. Although data-
structure techniques are available for representing sparse matrices, they are 
not particularly useful for this application, because of the way in which 
the protection facility is used. Here, we first describe several methods of 
implementing the access matrix and then compare the methods. 
14.5.1 Global Table 
The simplest implementation of the access matrix is a global table consisting 
of a set of ordered triples <domain, object, rights-set>. Whenever an operation 
M is executed on an object Oj within domain D;, the global table is searched 
for a triple <D;, 0 1, R~c>, with ME R~c. If this triple is found, the operation is 
allowed to continue; otherwise, an exception (or error) condition is raised. 
This implementation suffers from several drawbacks. The table is usually 
large and thus cannot be kept in main memory, so additional I/0 is needed. 
Virtual memory techniques are often used for managing this table. In addition, 
it is difficult to take advantage of special groupings of objects or domains. 
For example, if everyone can read a particular object, this object must have a 
separate entry in every domain. 
14.5.2 Access Lists for Objects 
Each column in the access matrix can be implemented as an access list for 
one object, as described in Section 10.6.2. Obviously, the empty entries can be 
discarded. The resulting list for each object consists of ordered pairs <domain, 
rights-set>, which define all domains with a nonempty set of access rights for 
that object. 
This approach can be extended easily to define a list plus a default set of 
access rights. When an operation M on an object Oi is attempted in domain 
D;, we search the access list for object 0 i, looking for an entry < D;, R1c > with 
ME RJc. If the entry is found, we allow the operation; if it is not, we check the 
default set. If M is in the default set, we allow the access. Otherwise, access is 
