1.1 
CH 
ER 
An 
is a program that manages the computer hardware. It 
also provides a basis for application programs and acts as an intermediary 
between the computer user and the computer hardware. An amazing aspect 
of operating systems is how varied they are in accomplishing these tasks. 
Mainframe operating systems are designed primarily to optimize utilization 
of hardware. Personal computer (PC) operating systems support complex 
games, business applications, and everything in between. Operating systems 
for handheld computers are designed to provide an environment in which a 
user can easily interface with the computer to execute programs. Thus, some 
operating systems are designed to be convenient, others to be efficient, and others 
some combination of the two. 
Before we can explore the details of computer system operation, we need 
to know something about system structure. We begin by discussing the basic 
functions of system startup, I/0, and storage. We also describe the basic 
computer architecture that makes it possible to write a functional operating 
system. 
Because an operating system is large and complex, it must be created 
piece by piece. Each of these pieces should be a well-delineated portion of the 
system, with carefully defined inputs, outputs, and functions. In this chapter, 
we provide a general overview of the major components of an operating 
system. 
To provide a grand tour of the major components of operating systems. 
To describe the basic organization of computer systems. 
We begin our discussion by looking at the operating system's role in the 
overall computer system. A computer system can be divided roughly into 
3 

4 
Chapter 1 
compiler 
assembler 
text editor 
operating system 
database 
system 
Figure 1.1 
Abstract view of the components of a computer system. 
four components: the hardware/ the operating system, the application programs/ 
and the users (Figure 1.1). 
The hardwa.te-the 
the 
and the 
<ievices-provides the basic computing resources for the 
system. The 
as word processors/ spreadsheets/ 
compilers, and Web browsers-define the ways in which these resources are 
used to solve users' computing problems. The operating system controls the 
hardware and coordinates its use among the various application programs for 
the various users. 
We can also view a computer system as consisting of hardware/ software/ 
and data. The operating system provides the means for proper use of these 
resources in the operation of the computer system. An operating system is 
similar to a government. Like a government, it performs no useful function by 
itself. It simply provides an environment within which other programs can do 
useful work. 
To understand more fully the operating systemfs role, we next explore 
operating systems from two viewpoints: that of the user and that of the system. 
1.1.1 
User View 
The user's view of the computer varies according to the interface being 
used. Most computer users sit in front of a PC, consisting of a monitor/ 
keyboard/ mouse, and system unit. Such a system is designed for one user 
to monopolize its resources. The goal is to maximize the work (or play) that 
the user is performing. In this case/ the operating system is designed mostly 
for 
with some attention paid to performance and none paid 
to 
various hardware and software resources are 
shared. Performance is, of course, important to the user; but such systems 

1.1 
5 
are optimized for the single-user experience rather than the requirements of 
multiple users. 
In other cases, a user sits at a terminal connected to a 
or a 
Other users are accessing the sance computer through other 
terminals. These users share resources and may exchange information. The 
operating system in S"Llclc cases is designed to maximize resource utilization-
to assure that all available CPU time, memory, and I/0 are used efficiently and 
tbat no individual user takes more than her fair share. 
In still otber cases, users sit at 
connected to networks of 
other workstations and 
These users have dedicated resources at their 
disposal, but they also share resources such as networking and servers-file, 
compute, and print servers. Therefore, their operating system is designed to 
compromise between individual usability and resource utilization. 
Recently, many varieties of handheld computers have come into fashion. 
Most of these devices are standalone units for individual users. Some are 
connected to networks, either directly by wire or (more often) through wireless 
modems and networking. Because of power, speed, and interface limitations, 
they perform relatively few remote operations. Their operating systems are 
designed mostly for individual usability, but performance per unit of battery 
life is important as well. 
Some computers have little or no user view. For example, embedded 
computers in home devices and automobiles may have numeric keypads and 
may turn indicator lights on or off to show status, but they and their operating 
systems are designed primarily to run without user intervention. 
1.1.2 System View 
From the computer's point of view, the operating system is the program 
most intimately involved with the hardware. In this context, we can view 
an operating system as a 
. A computer system has many 
resources that may be required to solve a problem: CPU time, memory space, 
file-storage space, I/0 devices, and so on. The operating system acts as the 
manager of these resources. Facing numerous and possibly conflicting requests 
for resources, the operating system must decide how to allocate them to specific 
programs and users so that it can operate the computer system efficiently and 
fairly. As we have seen, resource allocation is especially important where many 
users access the same mainframe or minicomputer. 
A slightly different view of an operating system emphasizes the need to 
control the various I/0 devices and user programs. An operating system is a 
control program. A 
manages the execution of user programs 
to prevent errors and improper use of the computer. It is especially concerned 
with the operation and control of I/O devices. 
1.1.3 Defining Operating Systems 
We have looked at the operating system's role from the views of the user 
and of the system. How, though, can we define what an operating system 
is? In general, we have no completely adequate definition of an operating 
system. Operating systems exist because they offer a reasonable way to solve 
the problem of creating a usable computing system. The fundamental goal 
of computer systems is to execute user programs and to make solving user 

6 
Chapter 1 
1.2 
STORAGE DEFINITIONS AND NOTATION 
A 
is the basic unit of computer storage. It can contain one of two values, 
zero and one. All other storage in a computer is based on collections of bits. 
Given enough bits, it is amazing how many things a computer can represent: 
numbers, letters, images, movies, sounds, documents, and programs, to name 
a few. A 
is 8 bits, and on most computers it is the smallest convenient 
chunk of storage. For example, most computers don't have an instruction 
to move a bit but do have one to move a byte. A less common term is 
which is a given computer architecture's native storage unit. A word is 
generally made up of one or more bytes. For example, a computer may have 
instructions to move 64-bit (8-byte) words. 
A kilobyte, or KB, is 1,024 bytes; a megabyte, or MB, is 1,0242 bytes; and 
a gigabyte, or GB, !s 1,0243 bytes. Computer manufacturers often round off 
these numbers and say that a megabyte is 1 million bytes and a gigabyte is 1 
billion bytes. 
problems easier. Toward this goal, computer hardware is constructed. Since 
bare hardware alone is not particularly easy to use, application programs are 
developed. These programs require certain common operations, such as those 
controlling the II 0 devices. The common functions of controlling and allocating 
resources are then brought together into one piece of software: the operating 
system. 
In addition, we have no universally accepted definition of what is part of the 
operating system. A simple viewpoint is that it includes everything a vendor 
ships when you order "the operating system." The features included, however, 
vary greatly across systems. Some systems take up less than 1 megabyte of 
space and lack even a full-screen editor, whereas others require gigabytes of 
space and are entirely based on graphical windowing systems. A more common 
definition, and the one that we usually follow, is that the operating system 
is the one program running at all times on the computer-usually called 
the 
. (Along with the kernel, there are two other types of programs: 
which are associated with the operating system but are not 
part of the kernel, and 
which include all programs not 
associated with the operation of the system.) 
The matter of what constitutes an operating system has become increas-
ingly important. In 1998, the United States Deparhnent of Justice filed suit 
against Microsoft, in essence claiming that Microsoft included too much func-
tionality in its operating systems and thus prevented application vendors from 
competing. For example, a Web browser was an integral part of the operating 
systems. As a result, Microsoft was found guilty of using its operating-system 
monopoly to limit competition. 
Before we can explore the details of how computer systems operate, we need 
general knowledge of the structure of a computer system. In this section, 
we look at several parts of this structure. The section is mostly concerned 

1.2 
THE STUDY OFOPERATING SYSTEMS 
There has neverbeenarnore interestirighnwtostud yoperating systems:· and 
it has neverb.een.e~sier.Theopen-sourc;e movernent has overtaken .operating 
systems, caJ.tsing marly ofthenctobemadeavailable in both source and binary 
(e~ecuta]Jle) fonnat.·.This Iistindud~~Linu)(, BSDUNIX/Solat•is,and part of• 
]\II~cos.x. Th~availa~ilityqf·source.code.q,llowsus.tostudyoperq,til}.gsy?tems 
frorrt theinsid,eout' . Questionsthat previo)1sly could onlyb~ answerecL~y 
looking atdocumentaticmor thebehayior.ofan op~rating system c.annow be 
answered by examining the code itself. 
In additi?n,. the rise of virtualization as a ll}.ainsfreafll. ( andfrequelltly free) 
cmnp)1ter ftmctionmakesitpos;~i1Jlet()runnmnyoperqtingsystems.ontop.of 
onecoresystem .. Forexample,VMware(J:lttp.://www .• vmwarE:).com):provides 
afree·''player'' on which hundreds.of free .''virtualappliilnces'' cann.m.Using 
this method,students call tryolit hundreds. ofoperatingsystems.withintheir 
existing operatingsystems .atno cost. 
... ··. . .. 
.·. ·.. · 
... · 
Operating .sy~temsthat are no lortge~ ~ofllmerci~lly viableltave been 
opell-~o}lrced asvvell, ·enablirtg·.usto study how system~ pperated i~< 
time.of•.•f~v.r~r CPU, ll}.emory,•·•etnd.storcrge•·•·.resoJ.trces,·····.An ... exten~iye.b).It·•not 
complete .•. list ()f 9pen'-sourct operafirtg-"system pr?j~?ts is .. availa~le £rom 
ht~p :// dm()~ ' org/ C:omp)1ters/Softp(lre /Operati»g:-Systems/p~~m._Sourc~/-
S. i.m 
.. • .. •· .. ·.u. l·a·t·o . .rs.•· .. o··.f······s·· .. P 
... e 
... c 
.. i.fi 
.. ·.·c·· . ·. ·•.h 
..... a 
... ·.r 
... ·.d 
...• w ... •·.a .•. r 
... e 
..... ·.· .... ar .. e· 
.. · .a·l·s·o 
.. · 
...... a·.··v 
.. •· ... a.il .. ·<1. b 
... ·.·.le·· ... ·.i·n···.· 
. · 
... · ... s .. om 
.•. ·. · 
. e. •.·.c.·.· .... a····.·s·e· s. '···· ... al . I.·.o 
....... w.· 
.•.. m.· .•··.g .. 
th~ operat~<g systell}.to.runon.''na~ve''.hardware, ... all~ithrrtthec?l}.fines 
of a modem CO!TIPJ-Iter and moderJ1 OPf/'atirtg ~ystem. For: example, a 
DECSYSTEMc20 simulator running on Mac OS X can boot TOPS-20, loa~. the 
~ource.tages;.·and modify al'ld comp~le·<l·.J:t.evvTOPS-20 .k~rneL ··Art·interested 
stltdent ~ar• search theint~rnet to find the origillal papers that de~cribe the 
operating systemand .. the.origipa~ manuals: 
Tl<e adve~t?fogen-source operafirtg sy~te1Tis also l}."lal<es it easy t?··.make 
the move fromstu~enttooper<:lting~systemdeveloper.With some knov.rledge, 
som~ effo1't, a11d an Internet connection,a student c;al'leven create a new 
operating-systemdistribution! Justa. fev.r years, ~go itwas diffic]_llt or 
if1Lpossible ··to. get acce~s·. to ·source co?e . . N?v.r·. that access is.·liJnited only 
bylt()wmuchtimeand disk space a student has. 
· 
7 
with computer-system organization, so you can skim or skip it if you already 
understand the concepts. 
1.2.1 Computer-System Operation 
A modern general-purpose computer system consists of one or more CPUs 
and a number of device controllers connected through a common bus that 
provides access to shared memory (Figure 1.2). Each device controller is in 
charge of a specific type of device (for example, disk drives, audio devices, and 
video displays). The CPU and the device controllers can execute concurrently, 
competing for memory cycles. To ensure orderly access to the shared memory, 
a memory controller is provided whose function is to synchronize access to the 
memory. 
For a computer to start rum<ing-for instance, when it is powered 
up or rebooted-it needs to have an initial program to run. This initial 

8 
Chapter 1 
mouse 
keyboard 
printer 
monitor 
O ~~~ 
(_rlo•i-nneh b 
Figure 1.2 A modern computer system. 
program, or 
tends to be simple. Typically, it is stored 
in read-only memory 
or electrically erasable programmable read-only 
memory 
known by the general term 
within the computer 
hardware. It initializes all aspects of the system, from CPU registers to device 
controllers to memory contents. The bootstrap program must know how to load 
the operating system and how to start executing that system. To accomplish this 
goal, the bootstrap program must locate and load into memory the operating-
system kernel. The operating system then starts executing the first process, 
such as "init," and waits for some event to occur. 
The occurrence of an event is usually signaled by an 
from either 
the hardware or the software. Hardware may trigger an interrupt at any time 
by sending a signal to the CPU, usually by way of the system bus. Software 
may trigger an interrupt 
executing a special operation called a 
(also called a 
When the CPU is interrupted, it stops what it is doing and immediately 
transfers execution to a fixed location. The fixed location usually contains 
the starting address where the service routine for the interrupt is located. 
The interrupt service routine executes; on completion, the CPU resumes the 
interrupted computation. A time line of this operation is shown in Figure 1.3. 
Interrupts are an important part of a computer architecture. Each computer 
design has its own interrupt mechanism, but several functions are common. 
The interrupt must transfer control to the appropriate interrupt service routine. 
The straightforward method for handling this transfer would be to invoke a 
generic routine to examine the interrupt information; the routine, in turn, 
would call the interrupt-specific handler. However, interrupts must be handled 
quickly. Since only a predefined number of interrupts is possible, a table of 
pointers to interrupt routines can be used instead to provide the necessary 
speed. The interrupt routine is called indirectly through the table, with no 
intermediate routine needed. Generally, the table of pointers is stored in low 
memory (the first hundred or so locations). These locations hold the addresses 
of the interrupt service routines for the various devices. This array, or 
of addresses is then indexed by a unique device number, given with 
the interrupt request, to provide the address of the interrupt service routine for 

CPU 
user 
1/0 
device 
process 
executing 
1/0 interrupt 
processing 
idle 
"~""~-~-
tmcefeniog 
I L 
.. 
1/0 
request 
1.2 
ll 
v 
-~~'"''''''~'"''"-~~ -~~-"] 
t---~---
''m'] 
L,~"~~~ 
transfer 
done 
1/0 
transfer 
request 
done 
Figure 1.3 Interrupt time line for a single process doing output. 
9 
the interrupting device. Operating systems as different as Windows and UNIX 
dispatch interrupts in this manner. 
The interrupt architecture must also save the address of the interrupted 
instruction. Many old designs simply stored the interrupt address in a 
fixed location or in a location indexed by the device number. More recent 
architectures store the return address on the system stack. If the interrupt 
routine needs to modify the processor state-for instance, by modifying 
register values-it must explicitly save the current state and then restore that 
state before returning. After the interrupt is serviced, the saved return address 
is loaded into the program counter, and the interrupted computation resumes 
as though the interrupt had not occurred. 
1.2.2 Storage Structure 
The CPU can load instructions only from memory, so any programs to run must 
be stored there. General-purpose computers run most of their programs from 
rewriteable memory, called main memory (also called 
or RAM). Main 
commonly is implemented in a semiconductor 
technology called 
Computers use 
other forms of memory as well. Because the read-only memory (ROM) camwt 
be changed, only static programs are stored there. The immutability of ROM 
is of use in game cartridges. EEPROM camwt be changed frequently and so 
contains mostly static programs. For example, smartphones have EEPROM to 
store their factory-il<stalled programs. 
All forms of memory provide an array of words. Each word has its 
own address. Interaction is achieved through a sequence of load or store 
instructions to specific memory addresses. The load instruction moves a word 
from main memory to an internal register within the CPU, whereas the store 
instruction moves the content of a register to main memory. Aside from explicit 
loads and stores, the CPU automatically loads instructions from main memory 
for execution. 
A typical instruction-execution cycle, as executed on a system with a 
architecture, first fetches an il1struction from memory and stores 
that instruction in the 
. The instruction is then decoded 
and may cause operands to be fetched from memory and stored in some 

10 
Chapter 1 
internal register. After the instruction on the operands has been executed, the 
result may be stored back in memory. Notice that the memory unit sees only 
a stream of memory addresses; it does not know how they are generated (by 
the instruction counter, indexing, indirection, literal addresses, or some other 
means) or what they are for (instructions or data). Accordingly, we can ignore 
how a memory address is generated by a program. We are interested only in 
the sequence of memory addresses generated by the running program. 
Ideally, we want the programs and data to reside in main ncemory 
permanently. This arrangement usually is not possible for the following two 
reasons: 
Main memory is usually too small to store all needed programs and data 
permanently. 
Main memory is a volatile storage device that loses its contents when 
power is turned off or otherwise lost. 
Thus, most computer systems provide 
as an extension 
of main memory. The main requirement for secondary storage is that it be able 
to hold large quantities of data permanently. 
The most common secondary-storage device is a 
which 
provides storage for both programs and data. Most programs (system and 
application) are stored on a disk until they are loaded into memory. Many 
programs then use the disk as both the source and the destination of their 
processing. Hence, the proper management of disk storage is of central 
importance to a computer system, as we discuss in Chapter 12. 
In a larger sense, however, the storage structure that we have described-
consisting of registers, main memory, and magnetic disks-is only one of many 
possible storage systems. Others include cache memory, CD-ROM, magnetic 
tapes, and so on. Each storage system provides the basic functions of storing 
a datum and holding that datum until it is retrieved at a later time. The main 
differences among the various storage systems lie in speed, cost, size, and 
volatility. 
The wide variety of storage systems in a computer system can be organized 
in a hierarchy (Figure 1.4) according to speed and cost. The higher levels are 
expensive, but they are fast. As we move down the hierarchy, the cost per bit 
generally decreases, whereas the access time generally increases. This trade-off 
is reasonable; if a given storage system were both faster and less expensive 
than another-other properties being the same-then there would be no 
reason to use the slower, more expensive memory. In fact, many early storage 
devices, including paper tape and core memories, are relegated to museums 
now that magnetic tape and 
have become faster and 
cheaper. The top four levels of memory in Figure 1.4 may be constructed using 
semiconductor memory. 
In addition to differing in speed and cost, the various storage systems 
are either volatile or nonvolatile. As mentioned earlier, 
loses 
its contents when the power to the device is removed. In the absence of 
expensive battery and generator backup systems, data must be written to 
for safekeeping. In the hierarchy shown in Figure 1.4, the 
the electronic disk are volatile, whereas those below 

1.3 
15 
Figure 1.6 Symmetric multiprocessing architecture. 
Solaris. The benefit of this model is that many processes can run simultaneously 
-N processes can run if there are N CPUs-without causing a significant 
deterioration of performance. However, we must carefully control I/0 to 
ensure that the data reach the appropriate processor. Also, since the CPUs 
are separate, one may be sitting idle while another is overloaded, resulting in 
inefficiencies. These inefficiencies can be avoided if the processors share certain 
data structures. A multiprocessor system of this form will allow processes and 
resources-such as memory-to be shared dynamically among the various 
processors and can lower the variance among the processors. Such a system 
must be written carefully, as we shall see in Chapter 6. Virtually all modern 
operating systems-including Windows, Windows XP, Mac OS X, and Linux 
-now provide support for SMP. 
The difference between symmetric and asymmetric multiprocessing may 
result from either hardware or software. Special hardware can differentiate the 
multiple processors, or the software can be written to allow only one master and 
multiple slaves. For instance, Sun's operating system SunOS Version 4 provided 
asymmetric multiprocessing, whereas Version 5 (Solaris) is symmetric on the 
same hardware. 
Multiprocessing adds CPUs to increase computing power. If the CPU has an 
integrated memory controller, then adding CPUs can also increase the amount 
of memory addressable in the system. Either way, multiprocessing can cause 
a system to change its memory access model from uniform memory access 
to non-uniform memory access 
UMA is defined as the situation 
in which access to any RAM from any CPU takes the same amount of time. With 
NUMA, some parts of memory may take longer to access than other parts, 
creating a performance penalty. Operating systems can minimize the NUMA 
penalty through resource management_, as discussed in Section 9.5.4. 
A recent trend in CPU design is to in.clude multiple computing 
on 
a single chip. In essence, these are multiprocessor chips. They can be more 
efficient than multiple chips with single cores because on-chip communication 
is faster than between-chip communication. In addition, one chip with multiple 
cores uses significantly less power than multiple single-core chips. As a result, 
multicore systems are especially well suited for server systems such as database 
and Web servers. 

16 
Chapter 1 
Figure 1.7 A dual-core design with two cores placed on the same chip. 
In Figure 1.7, we show a dual-core design with two cores on the same 
chip. In this design, each core has its own register set as well as its own local 
cache; other designs might use a shared cache or a combination of local and 
shared caches. Aside from architectural considerations, such as cache, memory, 
and bus contention, these multicore CPUs appear to the operating system 
as N standard processors. This tendency puts pressure on operating system 
designers-and application programmers-to make use of those CPUs. 
Finally, 
are a recent development in which multiple processor 
boards, I/0 boards, and networking boards are placed in the same chassis. 
The difference between these and traditional multiprocessor systems is that 
each blade-processor board boots independently and runs its own operating 
system. Some blade-server boards are n1.ultiprocessor as well, which blurs the 
lines between types of computers. In essence, these servers consist of multiple 
independent multiprocessor systems. 
1.3.3 Clustered Systems 
Another type of multiple-CPU system is the 
Like multipro-
cessor systems, clustered systems gather together multiple CPUs to accomplish 
computational work. Clustered systems differ from multiprocessor systems, 
however, in that they are composed of two or more individual systems-or 
nodes-joined together. The definition of the term clustered is not concrete; 
many commercial packages wrestle with what a clustered system is and why 
one form is better than another. The generally accepted definition is that clus-
tered computers share storage and are closely linked via a JC'.H.a,,·o.x 
(as described in Section 1.10) or a faster interconnect, such as InfiniBand. 
Clustering is usually used to provide 
service; that is, 
service will continue even if one or more systems in the cluster faiL High 
availability is generally obtained by adding a level of redundancy in the 
system. A layer of cluster software runs on the cluster nodes. Each node can 
monitor one or more of the others (over the LAN). If the monitored machine 
fails, the monitoring machine can take ownership of its storage and restart the 
applications that were running on the failed machine. The users and clients of 
the applications see only a brief interruption of service. 

1.3 
BEOWULF CLUSTERS 
Beowulf clusters are designed for solving high-performance computing 
tasks. These clusters are built using comm.odi ty hard ware-such as. personal 
computers-that are connected via a simple local area network Interestingly, 
a Beowulf duster uses no one specific software package but rather consists 
of a set of open-source software libraries that allow the con1puting nodes 
in the cluster to communicate with one another .. Thus,.there are a variety of 
approaches for constructing a Beowulf cluster, although Beowulf computing 
nodes typically run the Linux operating system. Since Beowulf clusters 
require no special hardware and operate using open~source software that 
is freely available, they offer a low-cost strategy for building a high~ 
performance computing cluster. In fact, some Beowulf clusters built from 
collections of discarded personal computers are using ht.mdreds of cornputing 
nodes to solve computationally expensive problems in scientific computing. 
Clusterin.g can be structured 
or symmetrically. In 
17 
one machine is in 
while the other is 
rmming the applications. The hot-standby host machine does nothing but 
monitor the active server. If that server fails, the hot-standby host becomes the 
active server. In 
two or more hosts are rmming applications 
and are monitoring each other. This mode is obviously more efficient, as it uses 
all of the available hardware. It does require that more than one application be 
available to run. 
As a cluster consists of several 
clusters may also be used to provide 
environ-
ments. Such systems can supply significantly greater computational power 
than single-processor or even SMP systems because they are capable of running 
an application concurrently on all computers in the cluster. However, appli-
cations must be written 
to take advantage of the cluster by using 
a technique known as 
which consists of dividing a program 
into separate components that run in parallel on individual computers in the 
cluster. Typically, these applications are designed so that once each computing 
node in the cluster has solved its portion of the problem, the results from all 
the nodes are combined into a final solution. 
Other forms of clusters include parallel clusters and clustering over a 
wide-area network (WAN) (as described in Section 1.10). Parallel clusters allow 
multiple hosts to access the same data on the shared storage. Because most 
operating systems lack support for simultaneous data access by multiple hosts, 
parallel clusters are usually accomplished by use of special versions of software 
and special releases of applications. For example, Oracle Real Application 
Cluster is a version of Oracle's database that has been designed to run on 
a parallel cluster. Each machine runs Oracle, and a layer of software tracks 
access to the shared disk. Each machine has full access to all data in the 
database. To provide this shared access to data, the system must also supply 
access control and locking to ensure that no conflicting operations occur. This 
function, commonly known as a 
is included 
in some cluster technology. 

18 
Chapter 1 
1.4 
interconnect 
interconnect 
computer 
computer 
computer 
Figure 1.8 General structure of a clustered system. 
Cluster technology is changing rapidly. Some cluster products support 
dozens of systems in a cluster, as well as clustered nodes that are separated 
by miles. Many of these improvements are made possible by 
(SAJ·~Is), as described in Section 12.3.3, which allow many systems 
to attach to a pool of storage. If the applications and their data are stored on 
the SAN, then the cluster software can assign the application to run on any 
host that is attached to the SAN. If the host fails, then any other host can take 
over. In a database cluster, dozens of hosts can share the same database, greatly 
increasing performance and reliability. Figure 1.8 depicts the general structure 
of a clustered system. 
Now that we have discussed basic information about computer-system orga-
nization and architecture, we are ready to talk about operating systems. 
An operating system provides the envirorunent within which programs are 
executed. Internally, operating systems vary greatly in their makeup, since 
they are organized along many different lines. There are, however, many 
commonalities, which we consider in this section. 
One of the most important aspects of operating systems is the ability 
to multiprogram. A single program cannot, in generat k~~p~ith_er thg CPU 
ortbt?J/Qgey:ic:es 1Jusy_C1t all times: Single users frequently have multiple 
programs running. Il.ul 
increases CPU utilization byorganizing 
jobs(codeand datafso 
. 
. ... . . _ 
hasoi1(0tO execl1te. 
-
· 
---- fhe idea is as follows: The op-ei:atlng system keeps several jobs in memory 
simultaneously (Figure 1.9). Since, in generat main memory is too small to 
accommodate all jobs, the jobs are kept initially on the disk in the 
This pool consists of all processes residing on disk awaiting allocation of main 
memory. 
Ih~ setofjobs inmemg_ry_canbe asubt:;et of the jobs kept in thejql:Jpoo1. 
The operating system picks and begins to execute one of the jobs in memory. 
Eventually, the job may have to wait for some task, such as an I/O operation, 

1.4 
19 
Figure 1.9 Memory layout for a multiprogramming system. 
!()_C()_tnpl~te: In a non-multiprogrammed system, the CPU would sit idle. In 
a multiprogrammed system, the operatilcg system simply switches to, and 
executes, another job. When that job needs to wait, the CPU is switched to 
another job, and so on. Eventually the first job finishes waiting and gets the 
CPU back. As long as at least one job needs to execute, the CPU is never idle. 
This idea is common in other life situations. A lawyer does not work for 
only one client at a time, for example. While one case is waiting to go to trial 
or have papers typed, the lawyer can work on another case. If he has enough 
clients, the lawyer will never be idle for lack of work. (Idle lawyers tend to 
become politicians, so there is a certain social value in keeping lawyers busy.) 
Multiprogrammed systems provide an environment in which the various 
system resources (for example, CPU, memory, and peripheral devices) are 
utilized effectively, but they do not provide for user interaction with the 
computer system. 
is_~l()gi~alex_tension of 
multiprogramming. ~' time-s!caring syste~s,the CPl] execu~eslnl1ltiplejobs 
by switcll.Ing~ainong them, but the switches occur so frequently that the ~1sers 
canh~teract with eachprograffi~v Ere l.t1sil.mning.--···· 
-Ti1ne shar:il~g requi.i-es an 
. . (or 
-
which provides direct communication between the user and the system. The 
user gives instructions to the operating system or to a program directly, using a 
input device such as a keyboard or a mouse, and waits for immediate results on 
an output device. Accordingly, !!'te 
sho~1ld be sh()rt=typically 
less than one second. 
A time-shared operating system allows many users to share the computer 
simultaneously. Since each action or command in a time-shared system tends 
to be short, only a little CPU time is needed for each user. As the system switches 
rapidly from one user to the next, each user is given the impression that the 
entire computer system is dedicated to his use, even though it is being shared 
among many users. 
A time-shared operating system 11ses CPU scheduling and multiprogram-
ming to provide each user with a small portion of a time-shared computer. 
Eachuserhas atleast or:t_e S§parateprogra111inmemory. A program loaded into 

20 
1.5 
Chapter 1 
memory and executing is called a 
When a process executes, it typically 
executes for only a short tirne 
it either finishes or needs to perform I/0. 
I/0 may be interactive; that is, output goes to a display for the user, and input 
comes from a user keyboard, mouse, or other device. Since interactive I/0 
typically runs at "people speeds," it may take a long time to complete. Input, 
for example, may be bounded by the user's typing speed; seven characters per 
second is fast for people but incredibly slow for computers. Rather than let 
the CPU sit idle as this interactive input takes place, the operating system will 
rapidly switch the CPU to the program of some other user. 
Time sharing and multiprogramming require that several jobs be kept 
simultaneously in memory. If several jobs are ready to be brought into memory, 
and if there is not enough room for all of them, then the system must choose 
among them. Making this decision is 
which is discussed in 
Chapter 5. When the operating system selects a job from the job pool, it loads 
that job into memory for execution. Having several programs in memory at the 
same time requires some form of memory management, which is covered in 
Chapters 8 and 9. In addition, !f_s~veraJjq}Jsaxere(lclY to rw~at the same time, 
the system must choose among them. Making this decision i~ _ _ sd1,2dviii·lg, 
which is discussed in Chapter 5. Finally, running multiple jobscoi~cl.lrl:ei1Hy 
requires that their ability to affect one another be limited in all phases of the 
operating system, including process scheduling, disk storage, and memory 
management. These considerations are discussed throughout the text. 
In a time-sharing system, the operating system must ensure reasonable 
response time, which is sometimes accomplished through 
where 
processes are swapped in and out of main memory to the disk. A more common 
method for achieving this goal 
tec:hDiql1~_fuC!t __ CillQws._ 
the execution of aprocessthat isnot completely inl1le1Yl_clD~- (Chapter 9). 
The main advai1tage of the virtual-memory scheme is that it enables users 
to run programs that are larger than actual 
. Further, it 
abstracts main memory into a large, uniform array of storage, separating logical 
as viewed by the user from physical memory. This arrangement frees 
programmers from concern over memory-storage limitations. 
Time-sharing systems must also provide a file system (Chapters 10 and 11). 
The file system resides on a collection of disks; hence, disk management must 
be provided (Chapter 12). Also, time-sharing systems provide a mechanism for 
protecting resources from inappropriate use (Chapter 14). To ensure orderly 
execution, the system must provide mechanisms for job synchronization and 
communication (Chapter 6), and it may ensure that jobs do not get stuck in a 
deadlock, forever waiting for one another (Chapter 7). 
}\SI1[e11tio11ecl ~arlier, rn()clETnopexatli1KSYStems_m~e _ 
If there 
are no processes to execute, no I/0 devices to service, and no users to whom 
to respond, an operating system will sit quietly waiting for something to 
happen. Events are almost always signaled by the occurrence of an interrupt 
or a trap. 
(or an 
is_ a software~generated interruptca~seci 
~it[ler byan error (for 
division byzero or invalid memory acc~ss_) 
or by a specific request from a user program that an operating-system service 

1.5 
21 
be performed. The interrupt-driven nature of an operating system defines 
that system's general structure. For each type of interrupt, separate segments 
of code in the operating system determine what action should be taken. An 
interrupt service routine is provided that is responsible for dealing with the 
interrupt. 
Since the operating system and the users share the hardware and software 
resources of the computer system, we need to make sure that an error in a 
user program could cause problems only for the one program running. With 
sharing, many processes could be adversely affected by a bug in one program. 
For example, if a process gets stuck in an infinite loop, this loop could prev.ent 
the correct operation of many other processes. More subtle errors can occur 
in a multiprogramming system, where one erroneous program might modify 
another program, the data of another program, or even the operating system 
itself. 
Without protection against these sorts of errors, either the computer must 
execute only one process at a time or all output must be suspect. A properly 
designed operating system must ensure that an incorrect (or malicious) 
program cannot cause other program~ to .~X.t;cute incorrectly. 
~~,;~,_C: 
·· 
;·..c·~ 
1.5.1 Dual-Mode Operation · 
In order to ensure the proper execution of the operating system, we must be 
able to distinguish between the execution of operating-system code and user-
defined code. The approach taken by most computer systems is to provide 
hardware support that allows us to differentiate among various modes of 
execution. 
At the very least we need two 
and 
(also called 
or 
A bit, called the 
is added to the hardware of the computer to 
indicate the current mode: kernel (0) or user (1). \!Viththeplode1:Jit\!Ve2lrea]Jle 
to distinguishbetween a task that is executed onbehalf of the operating system 
aicd one that is executeci on behalfoftheJJser, When tl~e computer systel.n1s 
executing on behalf of a user application, the system is in user mode. However, 
when a user application requests a service from the operating system (via a 
.. system call), it must transition from user to kernel mode to fulfill the request. 
/ This is shown in Figure 1.10. As we shall see, this architectural enhancement is 
useful for many other aspects of system operation as well. 
execute system call 
Figure 1. i 0 Transition from user to kernel mode. 
user mode 
(mode bit = I) 
kernel mode 
(mode bit = 0) 

22 
Chapter 1 
At system boot time, the hardware starts in kernel mode. The operating 
system is then loaded and starts user applications in user mode. Whenever a 
trap or interrupt occurs, the hardware switches from user mode to kernel mode 
(that is, changes the state of the mode bit to 0). Thus, whenever the operating 
system gains control of the computer, it is in kernel mode. The system always 
switches to user mode (by setting the mode bit to 1) before passing control to 
a user program. 
The dual mode of operation provides us with the means for protecting the 
operating system from errant users-and errant users from one another. }Ye 
_(!CC011lplishthis protection by designating some ofthe machineinE;tructions~ha! 
:trliJjT cal1_seJ~i:i~l11 
ins trucrci\}]<§l: Il1e hardware all~\<\'Spl·iyileg~d 
instrl]ctionsto be 
o11ly inkern~Ll11QQ_~, If an attempt is made to 
execute a privileged instruction in user mode, the hardware does not execute 
the instruction but rather treats it as illegal and traps it to the operating system. 
The instruction to switch to kernel mode is an example of a privileged 
instruction. Some other examples include I/0 controt timer management and 
interrupt management. As we shall see throughout the text, there are many 
additional privileged instructions. 
We can now see the life cycle of instruction execution in a computer system. 
Initial control resides in the operating system, where instructions are executed 
in kernel mode. When control is given to a user application, the mode is set to 
user mode. Eventually, control is switched back to the operating system via an 
interrupt, a trap, or a system call. 
_5ysiemcalls proyide the means for auser program to ask the operating 
2}'St~m to perforp:t tasks re_?erved forjhe operating syst~m gr1 the 1.lser 
.12l.:Qgra1ll'sbeha,lf A system call is invoked in a variety of ways, depending 
on the functionality provided by the underlying processor. In all forms, it is the 
method used by a process to request action by the operating system. A system 
call usually takes the form of a trap to a specific location in the interrupt vector. 
This trap can be executed by a generic trap instruction, although some systems 
(such as the MIPS R2000 family) have a specific syscall instruction. 
When asystep1 calljs e)(ecutect it is treated by the hardware as a software 
-i:rlt~rr:l.l:[if:C()iltrol passes through the interrupt vector to a service routine in 
the operating system/ and the m()de bit is set to kernel mode. The system-
caflserv1ce routine is a part of the operating system. The-kernel examines 
the interrupting instruction to determine what system call has occurred; a 
~ parameter indicates what type of service the user program is requesting. 
Additional information needed for the r~quest_may be passed in registers, 
on the stack/ or in memory (with pointers to the memory locations passed in 
registers). The kernel vedfies that the parameters are correct and legat executes 
ti1erequest, and returns control to the instruction following the system call. We 
describe system calls more fully in Section 2.3. 
The lack of a hardware-supported dual mode can cause serious shortcom-
ings in an operating system. For instance, MS-DOS was written for the Intel 
8088 architecture, which has no mode bit and therefore no dual mode. A user 
program rum1ing awry can wipe out the operating system by writing over it 
with data; and multiple programs are able to write to a device at the same time, 
with potentially disastrous results. Recent versions of the Intel CPU do provide 
dual-mode operation. Accordingly, most contemporary operating systems-
such as Microsoft Vista and Windows XP, as well as Unix, Linux, and Solaris 

1.6 
1.6 
23 
-take advantage of this dual-mode feature and provide greater protection for 
the operating system. 
Once hardware protection is in place, it detects errors that violate modes. 
These errors are normally handled by the operating system. If a user program 
fails in some way-such as by making an attempt either to execute an illegal 
instruction or to access memory that is not in the user's address space-then 
the hardware traps to the operating system. The trap transfers control through 
the interrupt vector to the operating system, just as an interrupt does. When 
a program error occurs, the operating system must terminate the program 
abnormally. This situation is handled by the same code as a user-requested 
abnormal termination. An appropriate error message is given, and the memory 
of the program may be dumped. The memory dump is usually written to a 
file so that the user or programmer can examine it and perhaps correct it and 
restart the program. 
1.5.2 Timer 
Wer:r1,_ust ensure th<t! the ope:J;atil}gsystemiJ:taintains t:ontrol overthe C}J_!:l_~ 
We cam1.ot allow a userp~ogram to_ get stuc:kin e1ninfinite loop or to fail 
to call syste1n seryices and never retltrn control to the c:>perating system. To 
~c<:9!ll£1I:S~ tl1.1s=g~at we_can usea 
_A_tirn~r_can beset to interrupt 
th~ c:c:>mp_ut~r af_t~ril §p~c:ified peri() d. The period may be fixed (for example, 
1/60 second) or variable (for example, from 1 millisecond to 1 second). A 
is generally implemented by a fixed-rate clock and a counter. 
The operating system sets the counter. Every time the clock ticks, the counter 
is decremented. When the counter reaches 0, an interrupt occurs. For instance, 
a 10-bit counter with a 1-millisecond clock allows interrupts at intervals from 
1 millisecond to 1,024 milliseconds, in steps of 1 millisecond. 
Before turning over control to the user, the operating system ensures 
that the timer is set to interrupt. lL~ll.~ __ tiJ11e_£_il1t~rrl1pts/control transfers 
automatically totll.e ()pel:9:t~~Y§!epl,_"\Thicfl__!l-1(1Ytreat the interrupt as a faiaf 
error or n:taygi-y_etll.ep_rograrn rnc:>r~!i:rn~:. Clearly,il~structions that modify the 
content of the timer are privileged. 
Thus, we can use the timer to prevent a user program from running too 
long. A simple technique is to il1.itialize a counter with the amount of time that a 
program is allowed to run. A program with a 7-minute time limit, for example, 
would have its counter initialized to 420. Every second, the timer interrupts 
and the counter is decremented by 1. As long as the counter is positive, control 
is returned to the user program. When the counter becomes negative, the 
operating system terminates the program for exceeding the assigned time 
limit. 
A program does nothing unless its instructions are executed by a CPU. A 
program in execution, as mentioned, is a process. A time-shared user program 
such as a compiler is a process. A word-processing program being run by an 
individual user on a PC is a process. A system task, such as sending output 
to a printer, can also be a process (or at least part of one). For now, you can 
consider a process to be a job or a time-shared program, but later you will learn 

24 
Chapter 1 
1.7 
that the concept is more general. As we shall see in Chapter 3, it is possible 
to provide system calls that allow processes to create subprocesses to execute 
concurrent! y. 
A process needs certain resources---including CPU time, me111ory, files, 
and-I;o devices:::_:_ to accomplish its:task These i·esources are e!tl1er given to 
the process when it is created or-allocated to it while it is running. In addition 
to the various physical and logical resources that a process obtains when it is 
created, various initialization data (input) may be passed along. For example, 
consider a process whose function is to display the status of a file on the screen 
of a terminal. The process will be given as an input the name of the file and will 
execute the appropriate instructions and system calls to obtain and display 
on the terminal the desired information. When the process terminates, the 
operating system will reclaim any reusable resources. 
l"Ve ~_111pl:t21size that a program by itselfis nota process; a program is a 
· y_assive er~!~ty, likt:tl1e C()I1terltsof a fil(?storecl_m1 c!iskL~A.ThereasC\_pr(Jce~~s_1s 21~1 
aCtive entity. A si-Dgl~::1hr:eaded proc~ss has on~_pr_ogra111 cou11!er s:eecifying the 
nexf1il~r:Uc_tiogt()_eX~ClJte. (Threads are covered in Chapter 4.) The -execi.rtioil. 
of such a process must be sequential. The CPU executes one instruction of the 
process after another, until the process completes. Further, at any time, one 
instruction at most is executed on behalf of the process. Thus, although two 
processes may be associated with the same program, they are nevertheless 
considered two separate execution sequences. A multithreaded process has 
multiple program counters, each pointing to the next instruction to execute for 
a given thread. 
A process is the unit of work in a system. Such a system consists of a 
collection of processes, some of which are operating-system processes (those 
that execute system code) and the rest of which are user processes (those that 
execute user code). Al]Jheseprocesses canp()t~!ltially execute concurrently-
_llY.IJ:lli}!p_l~)(_i!lg ()I'\a sir1gle _C:Pl],for_~)(ample. 
- -
-
--- ----
The operating system is responsible for the following activities in connec-
tion with process management: 
Scheduling processes and threads on the CPUs 
Creating and deleting both user and system processes 
Suspending and resuming processes 
Providing mechanisms for process synchronization 
Providing mechanisms for process communication 
We discuss process-management techniques in Chapters 3 through 6. 
As we discussed in Section 1.2.2, the main memory is central to the operation 
of a modern computer system. Main memory is a large array of words or bytes, 
ranging in size from hundreds of thousands to billions. Each word or byte has 
its own address. Main memory is a repository of quickly accessible data shared 
by the CPU and I/0 devices. The central processor reads instructions from main 

1.8 
1.8 
25 
memory during the instruction-fetch cycle and both reads and writes data from 
main memory during the data-fetch cycle (on a von Neumann architecture). 
As noted earlier, the main memory is generallythe only large storage device 
that the CPU is able to address and access directly. For example, for the CPU to 
process data from disk, those data mu.st first be transferred to main n"lemory 
by CPU-generated I/0 calls. In the same way, instructions must be in memory 
for the CPU to execute them. 
For a program to be executed, it must be mapped to absolute addresses and 
loaded into memory. As the program executes, it accesses program instructions 
and data from memory by generating these absolute addresses. Eventually, 
the program terminates, its memory space is declared available, and the next 
program can be loaded and executed. 
To improve both the utilization of the CPU and the speed of the computer's 
response to its users, general-purpose computers must keep several programs 
in memory, creating a need for memory management. Many different memory-
management schemes are used. These schemes reflect various approaches, and 
the effectiveness of any given algorithm depends on the situation. In selecting a 
memory-management scheme for a specific system, we must take into account 
many factors-especially the hardware design of the system. Each algorithm 
requires its own hardware support. 
The operating system is responsible for the following activities in connec-
tion with memory management: 
Keeping track of which parts of memory are currently being used and by 
whom 
Deciding which processes (or parts thereof) and data to move into and out 
of memory 
Allocating and deallocating memory space as needed 
Memory-management techniques are discussed il1 Chapters 8 and 9. 
To make the computer system convenient for users, the operating system 
provides a uniform, logical view of information storage. The operating system 
abstracts from the physical properties of its storage devices to define a logical 
storage unit, the file. The operating system maps files onto physical media and 
accesses these files via the storage devices. 
1.8.1 File-System Management 
Pile management is one of the most visible components of an operating system. 
Computers can store information on several different types of physical media. 
Magnetic disk, optical disk, and magnetic tape are the most common. Each 
of these media has its own characteristics and physical organization. Each 
medium is controlled by a device, such as a disk drive or tape drive, that 
also has its own unique characteristics. These properties include access speed, 
capacity, data-transfer rate, and access method (sequential or randmn). 

26 
Chapter 1 
A file is a collection of related information defined by its creator. Commonly, 
files represent programs (both source and object forms) and data. Data files may 
be numeric, alphabetic, alphanumeric, or binary. Files may be free-form (for 
example, text files), or they may be formatted rigidly (for example, fixed fields). 
Clearly, the concept of a file is an extremely general one. 
The operating system implements the abstract concept of a file by managing 
mass-storage media, such as tapes and disks, and the devices that control them. 
Also, files are normally organized into directories to make them easier to use. 
Finally, when multiple users have access to files, it may be desirable to control 
by whom and in what ways (for example, read, write, append) files may be 
accessed. 
The operating system is responsible for the following activities in connec-
tion with file management: 
Creating and deleting files 
Creating and deleting directories to organize files 
Supporting primitives for manipulating files and directories 
Mapping files onto secondary storage 
Backing up files on stable (nonvolatile) storage media 
File-management teclmiques are discussed in Chapters 10 and 11. 
1.8.2 Mass-Storage Management 
As we have already seen, because main memory is too small to accommodate 
all data and programs, and because the data that it holds are lost when power 
is lost, the computer system must provide secondary storage to back up main 
memory. Most modern computer systems use disks as the principal on-line 
storage medium for both programs and data. Most programs-including 
compilers, assemblers, word processors, editors, and formatters-are stored 
on a disk until loaded into memory and then use the disk as both the source 
and destination of their processing. Hence, the proper management of disk 
storage is of central importance to a computer system. The operating system is 
responsible for the following activities in connection with disk management: 
Free-space management 
Storage allocation 
Disk scheduling 
Because secondary storage is used frequently, it must be used efficiently. The 
entire speed of operation of a computer may hinge on the speeds of the disk 
subsystem and the algorithms that manipulate that subsystem. 
There are, however, many uses for storage that is slower and lower in cost 
(and sometimes of higher capacity) than secondary storage. Backups of disk 
data, seldom-used data, and long-term archival storage are some examples. 
Magnetic 
drives and their tapes and CD and DVD drives and platters are 
typical 
devices. The media (tapes and optical platters) vary 
between 
(write-once, read-many-times) and 
(read-write) formats. 

1.8 
27 
Tertiary storage is not crucial to systern performance, but it still must 
be managed. Some operating systems take on this task, while others leave 
tertiary-storage management to application progran1s. Some of the functions 
that operating systerns can provide include mounting and unmounting rnedia 
in devices, allocating and freeing the devices for exclusive use by processes, 
and migrating data from secondary to tertiary storage. 
Techniques for secondary and tertiary storage management are discussed 
in Chapter 12. 
1.8.3 Caching 
is an important principle of computer systems. Information is 
normally kept in some storage system (such as main memory). As it is used, 
it is copied into a faster storage system-the cache-on a temporary basis. 
When we need a particular piece of information, we first check whether it is 
in the cache. If it is, we use the information directly from the cache; if it is not, 
we use the information from the source, putting a copy in the cache under the 
assumption that we will need it again soon. 
In addition, internal programmable registers, . such as index registers, 
provide a high-speed cache for main memory. The programmer (or compiler) 
implements the register-allocation and register-replacement algorithms to 
decide which information to keep in registers and which to keep in main 
memory. There are also caches that are implemented totally in hardware. 
For instance, most systems have an instruction cache to hold the instructions 
expected to be executed next. Without this cache, the CPU would have to wait 
several cycles while an instruction was fetched from main memory. For similar 
reasons, most systems have one or more high-speed data caches in the memory 
hierarchy. We are not concerned with these hardware-only caches in this text, 
since they are outside the control of the operating system. 
Because caches have limited size, 
is an important 
design problem. Careful selection of the cache size and of a replacement policy 
can result in greatly increased performance. Figure 1.11 compares storage 
performance in large workstations and small servers. Various replacement 
algorithms for software-controlled caches are discussed in Chapter 9. 
Typical size 
<16MB 
<64GB 
>100GB 
Implementation 
custom memory with 
on-chip. or off-chip CMOS DRAM 
magnetic disk 
technology 
multiple ports, CMOS 
CMOSSRAM 
Access time (ns) 
0.25-0.5 
0.5-25 
80-250 
5,000.000 
Bandwidth (MB/sec) 20,000 ~ 100,000 
5000- 10,000 
1000-5000 
20-150 
Managed by 
compiler 
hardware 
operating system operating system 
Backed by 
cache 
main memory 
disk 
CD or tape 
Figure 1.11 
Performance of various levels of storage. 

28 
Chapter 1 
Main memory can be viewed as a fast cache for secondary storage, since 
data in secondary storage must be copied into main memory for use, and 
data must be in main memory before being moved to secondary storage for 
safekeeping. The file-system data, which resides permanently on secondary 
storage, may appear on several levels in the storage hierarchy. At the highest 
level, the operating system may maintain a cache of file-system data in main 
memory. In addition, electronic RAM disks (also known as 
may be used for high-speed storage that is accessed through the file-system 
interface. The bulk of secondary storage is on magnetic disks. The magnetic-
disk storage, in turn, is often backed up onto magnetic tapes or removable 
disks to protect against data loss in case of a hard-disk failure. Some systems 
autoinatically archive old file data from secondary storage to tertiary storage, 
such as tape jukeboxes, to lower the storage cost (see Chapter 12). 
The movement of information between levels of a storage hierarchy may 
be either explicit or implicit, depending on the hardware design and the 
controlling operating-system software. f_o].')!LStilnce,datatransfe~ from cache 
_l~CPU 
~'11~cl_ !"~g~~!~:r-_s _is __ ~1suall y ahardvvare function, with no op-era t[ii.g=sy-s tern 
intervention. In contrast, transfer of daTa-from- aisk to memory is usually 
controlledby the-op~ra-t!:ri.g"system. 
-
- fn a 11ier2rrchical storage structure, the same data may appear in different 
levels of the storage system. For example, suppose that an integer A that is to 
be incremented by 1 is located in file B, and file B resides on magnetic disk. 
The increment operation proceeds by first issuing an I/O operation to copy the 
disk block on which A resides to main memory. This operation is followed by 
copying A to the cache and to an internal register. Thus, the copy of A appears 
in several places: on the magnetic disk, in main memory, in the cache, and in an 
internal register (see Figure 1.12). Once the increment takes place in the internal 
register, the value of A differs in the various storage systems. The value of A 
becomes the same only after the new value of A is written from the internal 
register back to the magnetic disk. 
In a computing environment where only one process executes at a tim.e, 
this arrangement poses no difficulties, since an access to integer A will always 
be to the copy at the highest level of the hierarchy. However, in a multitasking 
environment, where the CPU is switched back and -forth-among var1ous 
processes~ extreme care must be taken to ensure that, if several processe~vv:is}l 
i:o-accessA, then each of these processes will obtain the most recently updated 
___ c_=--.C. of A. 
-
-
-
-
The situation becomes more complicated in a multiprocessor environment 
where, in addition to maintaining internal registers, each of the CPUs also 
contains a local cache (Figure 1.6). ~'"1_ su~bC1:.1l_<:_n~i£o!_l:_Il'l_~1lt,~S<2EY()f_A IJ.t~y 
exist simultaneouslyinseyeral caches. Since the variousCPUs can all execute 
.S:2~1c~r~~l~tly,"\,Ve-must1nake surethat an 
to the value ofA in one cache 
Figure 1.12 Migration of integer A from disk to register. 

1.9 
1.9 
29 
1.8.4 1/0 Systems 
One of the purposes of a11 operating system is to hide the peculiarities ofspecific 
hardware d~~ic:~Jro1n th~l1S~J:: For example, in UNIX, the peculiarities of I/O 
devices are hidden from the bulk of the operating system itself by the I/0 
subsystem. The I/O subsystem consists of several components: 
A memory-management component that includes buffering, caching, and 
spooling 
A general device-driver interface 
Drivers for specific hardware devices 
Only the device driver knows the peculiarities of the specific device to which 
it is assigned. 
We discussed in Section 1.2.3 how interrupt handlers and device drivers are 
used in the construction of efficient I/O subsystems. In Chapter 13, we discuss 
how the I/O subsystem interfaces to the other system components, manages 
devices, transfers data, and detects I/0 completion. 
If a computer system has multiple users and allows the concurrent execution 
of multiple processes, then access to data must be regulated. For that purpose, 
mechanisms ensure that files, memory segments, CPU, and other resources can 
be operated on by only those processes that have gained proper authoriza-
tion from the operating system. For example, memory-addressing hardware 
ensures that a process can execute only within its own address space. The 
timer ensures that no process can gain control of the CPU without eventually 
relinquishing control. Device-control registers are not accessible to users, so 
the integrity of the various peripheral devices is protected. 
Protection, then, is any mechanism for controlling the access of processes 
or users-to the resourcesdefined by a computer system. This mechanism rni1st 
provide means to speCify the confrols to be imposed and means to enforce the 
controls. 
Protection can improve reliability by detecting latent errors at the interfaces 
between component subsystems. Early detection of interface errors can often 
prevent contamination of a healthy subsystem by another subsystem that is 

30 
Chapter 1 
1.10 
malfunctioning. Furthermore, an unprotected resource cannot defend against 
use (or n<isuse) by an unauthorized or incompetent user. A protection-oriented 
system provides a means to distinguish between authorized and unauthorized 
usage, as we discuss in Chapter 14. 
6§yt:;terl<_ca1lhave adequateprotection but still be prone to failure and 
aDo_w inappr()priat~ acs~s~: Consider a user whose authentication information 
(her means of identifying herself to the system) is stolen. Her data could be 
copied or deleted, even though file and memory protection are working. It is 
the job of 
to defend a system from external and internal attacks. Such 
attacks spread across a huge range and include viruses and worms, denial-of-
service attacks (which use all of a system's resources and so keep legitimate 
users out of the system), identity theft, and theft of service (unauthorized use 
of a system). Prevention of some of these attacks is considered an operating-
system function on some systems, while other systems leave the prevention to 
policy or additional software. Due to the alarming rise in security incidents, 
operating-system security features represent a fast-growing area of research 
and implementation. Security is discussed in Chapter 15. 
Protection and security require the system to be able to distinguish among 
all its users. Most 
maintain a list of user names and 
--·--
-
In Windows Vista parlance, this is _<1_ 
These numerical IDs are unique, one per user. When a user 
logs in 
system, the authentication stage determines the appropriate user 
ID for the user. That user ID is associated with all of the user's processes and 
threads. When an ID needs to be user readable, it is translated back to the user 
name via the user name list. 
In some circumstances, we wish to distinguish among sets of users rather 
than individual users. For example, the owner of a file on a UNIX system may be 
allowed to issue all operations on that file, whereas a selected set of users may 
only be allowed to read the file. To accomplish this, we need to define a group 
name and the set of users belonging to that group. Group functionality can 
be implemented as a system-wide list of group names and 
ic'1entifiers. 
A user can be in one or more groups, depending on operating-system design 
decisions. The user's group IDs are also included in every associated process 
and thread. 
In the course of normal use of a system, the user ID and 
are s-l.iffici.e11t. HoV\Tever; a user sometimes needs to 
to gain 
extra permissions for an activity. The user may need access to a 
fhatis 
resh;icted,for examp1e.Operatmg systems provide various methods to allow 
privilege escalation. On UNIX, for example, the setuid attribute on a program 
causes that program to run with the user ID of the owner of the file, rather than 
the current user's ID. The process runs with this 
until it turns off 
the extra privileges or terminates. 
A distributed system is a collection of physically separate, possibly heteroge-
neous, computer systems that are networked to provide the users with access 
to the various resources that the system maintains. Access to a shared resource 

1.10 
31 
increases computation speed, functionality, data availability, and reliability. 
Some operating systems generalize network access as a form of file access, with 
the details of networking contained in the network interface's device driver. 
Others make users specifically invoke network functions. Generally, systems 
contain a mix of the two modes-for example FTP and NFS. The protocols 
that create a distributed system can greatly affect that system's utility and 
popularity. 
A 
in the simplest terms, is a communication path between 
two or more systems. Distributed systems depend on networking for their 
functionality. Networks vary by the protocols used, the distances between 
nodes, and the transport media. TCP /IP is the most common network protocol, 
although ATM and other protocols are in widespread use. Likewise, operating-
system support of protocols varies. Most operating systems support TCP /IP, 
including the Windows and UNIX operating systems. Some systems support 
proprietary protocols to suit their needs. To an operating system, a network 
protocol simply needs an interface device-a network adapter, for example-
with a device driver to manage it, as well as software to handle data. These 
concepts are discussed throughout this book. 
Networks are characterized based on the distances between their nodes. 
A 
computers within a room, a floor, 
or a building. A 
N) usually links buildings, cities, 
or countries. A global company may have a WAN to com1ect its offices 
worldwide. These networks may run one protocol or several protocols. The 
continuing advent of new technologies brings about new forms of networks. 
For example, a 
{]'/!Al··I} could link buildings within 
'.::a city. BlueTooth and 802.11 devices use wireless technology to commt.micate 
over a distance of several feet, in essence creating a 
such 
as might be found in a home. 
The media to carry networks are equally varied. They include copper wires, 
fiber strands, and wireless transmissions between satellites, microwave dishes, 
and radios. When computing devices are connected to cellular phones, they 
create a network. Even very short-range infrared communication can be used 
for networking. At a rudimentary level, whenever computers communicate, 
they use or create a network. These networks also vary in their performance 
and reliability. 
Some operating systems have taken the concept of networks and dis-
tributed systems further than the notion of providing network connectivity. A 
is an operating system that provides features such 
as file sharing across the network and that includes a communication scheme 
that allows different processes on different computers to exchange messages. 
A computer rmming a network operating system acts autonomously from all 
other computers on the network, although it is aware of the network and is 
able to communicate with other networked computers. A distributed operat-
ing system provides a less autonomous envirorunent: The different operating 
systems comm"Lmicate closely enough to provide the illusion that only a single 
operating system controls the network. 
We cover computer networks and distributed systems in Chapters 16 
through 18. 

32 
Chapter 1 
1.11 
The discussion thus far has focused on the general-purpose computer systems 
that we are all familiar with. There are, however, other classes of computer 
systems whose functions are more limited and whose objective is to deal with 
limited computation domains. 
1.11.1 
Real-Time Embedded Systems 
Embedded computers are the most prevalent form of computers in existence. 
These devices are found everywhere, from car engines and manufacturing 
robots to DVDs and microwave ovens. They tend to have very specific tasks. 
The systencs they run on are usually primitive, and so the operating systems 
provide limited features. Usually, they have little or no user interface, preferring 
to spend their time monitoring and managing hardware devices, such as 
automobile engines and robotic arms. 
These embedded systems vary considerably. Some are general-purpose 
computers, running standard operating systems-such as UNIX-with 
special-purpose applications to implement the functionality. Others are 
hardware devices with a special-purpose embedded operating system 
providing just the functionality desired. Yet others are hardware devices 
with application-specific integrated circuits 
that perform their tasks 
without an operating system. 
The use of embedded systems continues to expand. The power of these 
devices, both as standalone units and as elements of networks and the Web, 
is sure to increase as well. Even now, entire houses can be computerized, so 
that a central computer-either a general-purpose computer or an embedded 
system-can control heating and lighting, alarm systems, and even coffee 
makers. Web access can enable a home owner to tell the house to heat up 
before she arrives home. Someday, the refrigerator may call the grocery store 
when it notices the milk is gone. 
Embedded systems almost always run 
A 
real-time system is used when rigid time requirements 
been placed on 
the operation of a processor or the flow of data; thus, it is often used as a 
control device in a dedicated application. Sensors bring data to the computer. 
The computer must analyze the data and possibly adjust controls to modify 
the sensor inputs. Systems that control scientific experiments, medical imaging 
systems, industrial control systems, and certain display systems are real-
time systems. Some automobile-engine fuel-injection systems, home-appliance 
controllers, and weapon systems are also real-time systems. 
A real-time system has well-defined, fixed time constraints. Processing 
must be done within the defined constraints, or the system will fail. For instance, 
it would not do for a robot arm to be instructed to halt after it had smashed 
into the car it was building. A real-time system functions correctly only if it 
returns the correct result within its time constraints. Contrast this system with 
a time-sharing system, where it is desirable (but not mandatory) to respond 
quickly or a batch system, which may have no time constraints at all. 
In Chapter 19, we cover real-time embedded systems in great detail. In 
Chapter 5, we consider the scheduling facility needed to implement real-time 
functionality in an operating system. In Chapter 9, we describe the design 

1.11 
33 
of memory management for real-time computing. Finally, in Chapter 22, we 
describe the real-time components of the Windows XP operating system. 
1.11.2 Multimedia Systems 
Most operating systems are designed to handle conventional data such as 
text files, progran'ls, word-processing documents, and spreadsheets. However, 
a recent trend in technology is the incorporation of multimedia data into 
computer systems. Multimedia data consist of audio and video files as well as 
conventional files. These data differ from conventional data in that multimedia 
data-such as frames of video-must be delivered (streamed) according to 
certain time restrictions (for example, 30 frames per second). 
Multimedia describes a wide range of applications in popular use today. 
These include audio files such as MP3, DVD movies, video conferencing, and 
short video clips of movie previews or news stories downloaded over the 
Internet. Multimedia applications may also include live webcasts (broadcasting 
over the World Wide Web) of speeches or sporting events and even live 
webcams that allow a viewer in Manhattan to observe customers at a cafe 
in Paris. Multimedia applications need not be either audio or video; rather, a 
multimedia application often includes a combination of both. For example, a 
movie may consist of separate audio and video tracks. Nor must multimedia 
applications be delivered only to desktop personal computers. Increasingly, 
they are being directed toward smaller devices, including PDAs and cellular 
telephones. For example, a stock trader may have stock quotes delivered 
wirelessly and in real time to his PDA. 
In Chapter 20, we explore the demands of multimedia applications, 
describe how multimedia data differ from conventional data, and explain how 
the nature of these data affects the design of operating systems that support 
the requirements of multimedia systems. 
1.11.3 Handheld Systems 
include personal digital assistants (PDAs), such as Palm 
and Pocket-Pes, and cellular telephones, many of which use special-purpose 
embedded operating systems. Developers of handheld systems and applica-
tions face many challenges, most of which are due to the limited size of such 
devices. For example, a PDA is typically about 5 inches in height and 3 inches 
in width, and it weighs less than one-half pound. Because of their size, most 
handheld devices have small amounts of memory, slow processors, and small 
display screens. We take a look now at each of these limitations. 
The amount of physical memory in a handheld depends on the device, but 
typically it is somewhere between 1 MB and 1 GB. (Contrast this with a typical 
PC or workstation, which may have several gigabytes of memory.) As a result, 
the operating system and applications must manage memory efficiently. This 
includes returning all allocated memory to the memory manager when the 
memory is not being used. In Chapter 9, we explore virtual memory, which 
allows developers to write programs that behave as if the system has more 
memory than is physically available. Currently, not many handheld devices 
use virtual memory techniques, so program developers must work within the 
confines of limited physical memory. 

34 
Chapter 1 
1.12 
A second issue of concern to developers of handheld devices is the speed 
of the processor used in the devices. Processors for most handheld devices 
run at a fraction of the speed of a processor in a PC. Faster processors require 
more power. To include a faster processor in a handheld device would require 
a larger battery, which would take up more space and would have to be 
replaced (or recharged) more frequently. Most handheld devices use smaller, 
slower processors that consume less power. Therefore, the operating system 
and applications must be designed not to tax the processor. 
The last issue confronting program designers for handheld devices is l/0. 
A lack of physical space limits input methods to small keyboards, handwriting 
recognition, or small screen-based keyboards. The small display screens limit 
output options. Whereas a monitor for a home computer may measure up to 
30 inches, the display for a handheld device is often no more than 3 inches 
square. Familiar tasks, such as reading e-mail and browsing Web pages, must 
be condensed into smaller displays. One approach for displaying the content 
in Web pages is 
where only a small subset of a Web page is 
delivered and displayed on the handheld device. 
Some handheld devices use wireless technology, such as BlueTooth or 
802.11, allowing remote access to e-mail and Web browsing. Cellular telephones 
with connectivity to the Internet fall into this category. However, for PDAs that 
do not provide wireless access, downloading data typically requires the user 
first to download the data to a PC or workstation and then download the data 
to the PDA. Some PDAs allow data to be directly copied from one device to 
another using an infrared link 
Generally, the limitations in the functionality of PDAs are balanced by 
their convenience and portability. Their use continues to expand as network 
com1ections become more available and other options, such as digital cameras 
and MP3 players, expand their utility. 
So far, we have provided an overview of computer-system organization and 
major operating-system components. We conclude with a brief overview of 
how these are used in a variety of computing environments. 
1.12.1 Traditional Computing 
As computing matures, the lines separating many of the traditional computing 
environments are blurring. Consider the "typical office environment." Just a 
few years ago, this environment consisted of PCs connected to a network, 
with servers providing file and print services. Remote access was awkward, 
and portability was achieved by use of laptop computers. Terminals attached 
to mainframes were prevalent at many companies as well, with even fewer 
remote access and portability options. 
The current trend is toward providing more ways to access these computing 
environments. Web technologies are stretching the boundaries of traditional 
computing. Companies establish 
which provide Web accessibility 
to their internal servers. 
ccxEpu1as are essentially terminals that 
understand Web-based computing. Handheld computers can synchronize with 

1.12 
35 
PCs to allow very portable use of con1pany information. Handheld PDAs can 
also connect to 
to use the company's Web portal (as well as 
the myriad other Web resources). 
At home, most users had a single computer with a slow modem connection 
to the office, the Internet, or both. Today, network-connection speeds once 
available only at great cost are relatively inexpensive, giving home users more 
access to more data. These fast data connections are allowing home computers 
to serve up Web pages and to run networks that include printers, client PCs, 
and servers. Some homes even have 
to protect their networks from 
security breaches. Those firewalls cost thousands of dollars a few years ago 
and did not even exist a decade ago. 
In the latter half of the previous century, computing resources were scarce. 
(Before that, they were nonexistent!) For a period of time, systems were either 
batch or interactive. Batch systems processed jobs in bulk, with predetermined 
input (from files or other sources of data). Interactive systems waited for 
input from users. To optimize the use of the computing resources, multiple 
users shared time on these systems. Time-sharing systems used a timer and 
scheduling algorithms to rapidly cycle processes through the CPU, giving each 
user a share of the resources. 
Today, traditional time-sharing systems are uncommon. The same schedul-
ing technique is still in use on workstations and servers, but frequently the 
processes are all owned by the same user (or a single user and the operating 
system). User processes, and system processes that provide services to the user, 
are managed so that each frequently gets a slice of computer time. Consider 
the windows created while a user is working on a PC, for example, and the fact 
that they may be performing different tasks at the same time. 
1.12.2 Client-Server Computing 
As PCs have become faste1~ more powerful, and cheaper, designers have shifted 
away from centralized system architecture. Terminals connected to centralized 
systems are now being supplanted by PCs. Correspondingly, user-interface 
functionality once handled directly by centralized systems is increasingly being 
handled by PCs. As a result, many of today' s systems act as 
to satisfy requests generated by 
This form of specialized 
distributed system, called a 
system, has the general structure 
depicted in Figure 1.13. 
Server systems can be broadly categorized as compute servers and file 
servers: 
Figure 1.13 General structure of a client-server system. 

36 
Chapter 1 
The 
provides an interface to which a client can 
send a request to perform an action (for example, read data); in response, 
the server executes the action and sends back results to the client A server 
running a database that responds to client requests for data is an example 
of such a system. 
The 
provides a file-system interface where clients can 
create, update, read, and delete files. An example of such a system is a Web 
server that delivers files to clients running Web browsers. 
1.12.3 Peer-to-Peer Computing 
Another structure for a distributed system is the peer-to-peer (P2P) system 
model. In this model, clients and servers are not distinguished from one 
another; instead, all nodes within the system are considered peers, and each 
ncay act as either a client or a server, depending on whether it is requesting or 
providing a service. Peer-to-peer systems offer an advantage over traditional 
client-server systems. In a client-server system, the server is a bottleneck; but 
in a peer-to-peer system, services can be provided by several nodes distributed 
throughout the network. 
To participate in a peer-to-peer system, a node must first join the network 
of peers. Once a node has joined the network, it can begin providing services 
to-and requesting services from -other nodes in the network. Determining 
what services are available is accomplished in one of two general ways: 
When a node joins a network, it registers its service with a centralized 
lookup service on the network. Any node desiring a specific service first 
contacts this centralized lookup service to determine which node provides 
the service. The remainder of the communication takes place between the 
client and the service provider. 
A peer acting as a client must first discover what node provides a desired 
service by broadcasting a request for the service to all other nodes in the 
network. The node (or nodes) providing that service responds to the peer 
making the request. To support this approach, a discovery protocol must be 
provided that allows peers to discover services provided by other peers in 
the network. 
Peer-to-peer networks gained widespread popularity in the late 1990s with 
several file-sharing services, such as Napster and Gnutella, that enable peers 
to exchange files with one another. The Napster system uses an approach 
similar to the first type described above: a centralized server maintains an 
index of all files stored on peer nodes in the Napster network, and the actual 
exchanging of files takes place between the peer nodes. The Gnutella system 
uses a technique similar to the second type: a client broadcasts file requests 
to other nodes in the system, and nodes that can service the request respond 
directly to the client. The future of exchanging files remains uncertain because 
many of the files are copyrighted (music, for example), and there are laws 
governing the distribution of copyrighted material. In any case, though, peer-
to-peer technology undoubtedly will play a role in the future of many services, 
such as searching, file exchange, and e-mail. 

1.13 
1.13 
37 
1.12.4 Web-Based Computing 
The Web has become ubiquitous/ leading to more access by a wider variety of 
devices than was dreamt of a few years ago. PCs are still the most prevalent 
access devices/ with workstations/ handheld PDAs 1 and even cell phones also 
providing access. 
Web computing has increased the emphasis on networking. Devices that 
were not previously networked now include wired or wireless access. Devices 
that were networked now have faster network connectivity/ provided by either 
improved networking technology optimized network implementation code/ 
or both. 
The implementation of Web-based computing has given rise to new 
categories of devices/ such as 
which distribute network 
connections an1.ong a pool of similar servers. Operating systems like Windows 
95 1 which acted as Web clients/ have evolved into Linux and Windows XP 1 which 
can act as Web servers as well as clients. Generally/ the Web has increased the 
complexity of devices because their users require them to be Web-enabled. 
The study of operating systems/ as noted earlier/ is made easier by the 
availability of a vast number of open-source releases. 
are those made available in source-code format rather than as 
compiled binary code. Linux is the most famous open- source operating system, 
while Microsoft Windows is a well-known example of the opposite dosed-
approach. Starting with the source code allows the programmer to 
produce binary code that can be executed on a system. Doing the opposite-
the source code from the binaries-is quite a lot of work1 
and useful items such as comments are never recovered. Learning operating 
systems by examining the actual source code1 rather than reading summaries of 
that code/ can be extremely useful. With the source code in hand/ a student can 
modify the operating system and then compile and nm the code to try out those 
changes1 which is another excellent learning tool. This text indudes projects 
that involve modifying operating system source code/ while also describing 
algorithms at a high level to be sure all important operating system topics are 
covered. Throughout the text1 we provide pointers to examples of open-source 
code for deeper study. 
There are many benefits to open-source operating systems/ including a 
commtmity of interested (and usually unpaid) programmers who contribute 
to the code by helping to debug it analyze it/ provide support/ and suggest 
changes. Arguably/ open-source code is more secure than closed-source code 
because many more eyes are viewing the code. Certainly open-source code has 
bugs/ but open-source advocates argue that bugs tend to be found and fixed 
faster owing to the number of people using and viewing the code. Companies 
that earn revenue from selling their programs tend to be hesitant to open-source 
their code/ but Red Hat/ SUSE1 Sun/ and a myriad of other companies are doing 
just that and showing that commercial companies benefit/ rather than suffer/ 
when they open-source their code. Revenue can be generated through support 
contracts and the sale of hardware on which the software runs/ for example. 

2.1 
An operating system provides the environment within which programs are 
executed. Internally, operating systems vary greatly in their makeup, since 
they are organized along many different lines. The design of a new operating 
system is a major task. It is important that the goals of the system be well 
defined before the design begins. These goals form the basis for choices among 
various algorithms and strategies. 
We can view an operating system from several vantage points. One view 
focuses on the services that the system provides; another, on the interface that 
it makes available to users and programmers; a third, on its components and 
their interconnections. In this chapter, we explore all three aspects of operating 
systems, showin.g the viewpoints of users, programmers, and operating-system 
designers. We consider what services an operating system provides, how 
they are provided, how they are debugged, and what the various method-
ologies are for designing such systems. Finally, we describe how operating 
systems are created and how a computer starts its operating system. 
To describe the services an operating system provides to users, processes, 
and other systems. 
To discuss the various ways of structuring an operating system. 
To explain how operating systems are installed and customized and how 
they boot. 
An operating system provides an environment for the execution of programs. 
It provides certain services to programs and to the users of those programs. 
The specific services provided, of course, differ from one operating system to 
another, but we can identify common classes. These operating-system services 
are provided for the convenience of the programmer, to n1.ake the programming 
49 

50 
Chapter 2 
user and other system programs 
hardware 
Figure 2. i 
A view of operating system services. 
task easier. Figure 2.1 shows one view of the various operating-system services 
and how they interrelate. 
One set of operating-system services provides functions that are helpfuJ to 
the user. 
~ 
~ 
User interface. Almost all operating systems have a 
This interface can take several forms. One is a Dcfr'":c;~, 
which uses text commands and a method for entering them 
(say, a program to allow entering and editing of commands). Another is 
a batch 
in which commands and directives to control those 
commands are entered into files, and those files are executed. Most 
commonly, a 
is used. Here, the interface 
is a window system with a pointing device to direct I/0, choose from 
menus, and make selections and a keyboard to enter text. Some systems 
provide two or all three of these variations. 
Program execution. The system must be able to load a program into 
memory and to run that program. The program must be able to end its 
execution, either normally or abnormally (indicating error). 
I/O operations. A running program may require I/0, which may involve a 
file or an I/0 device. For specific devices, special functions may be desired 
(such as recording to a CD or DVD drive or blanking a display screen). For 
efficiency and protection, users usually cannot control I/0 devices directly. 
Therefore, the operating system must provide a means to do I/0. 
File-system manipulation. The file system is of particular interest. Obvi-
ously, programs need to read and write files and directories. They also 
need to create and delete them by name, search for a given file, and list file 
information. Finally, some programs include permissions management to 
allow or deny access to files or directories based on file ownership. Many 
operating systems provide a variety of file systems, sometimes to allow 
personal choice, and sometimes to provide specific features or performance 
characteristics. 

2.1 
51 
Communications. There are many circumstances in which one process 
needs to exchange information with another process. Such communication 
ncay occur between processes that are executing on the same computer 
or between processes that are executing on different computer systems 
tied together by a computer network. Communications may be imple-
mented via shared rnenwry or through message passing, in which packets of 
information are moved between processes by the operating system. 
Error detection. The operating system needs to be constantly aware of 
possible errors. Errors may occur in the CPU and memory hardware (such 
as a memory error or a power failure), in I/0 devices (such as a parity error 
on tape, a connection failure on a network, or lack of paper in the printer), 
and in the user program (such as an arithmetic overflow, an attempt to 
access an illegal memory location, or a too-great use of CPU time). For each 
type of error, the operating system should take the appropriate action to 
ensure correct and consistent computing. Of course, there is variation in 
how operating systems react to and correct errors. Debugging facilities can 
greatly enhance the user's and programmer's abilities to use the system 
efficiently. 
Another set of operating-system functions exists not for helping the user 
but rather for ensuring the efficient operation of the system itself. Systems with 
multiple users can gain efficiency by sharing the computer resources among 
the users. 
Resource allocation. When there are I}lultiple usersormultiple jobs 
rmuung at the sametime, resources must be allocated to each of them. 
Many d1Herent -types of resources are managed by the operating system. 
Some (such as CPU cycles, main memory, and file storage) may have special 
allocation code, whereas others (such as I/0 devices) may have much more 
general request and release code. For instance, in determining how best to 
use the CPU, operating systems have CPU-scheduling routines that take into 
account the speed of the CPU, the jobs that must be executed, the number of 
registers available, and other factors. There may also be routines to allocate 
printers, modems, USB storage drives, and other peripheral devices. 
Accounting. Vl[e want to_keeptrack of whichusers use}lovy rnL1C:hand 
what kindsofcomputer resources. This record keeping may be used for 
accoun:tii1g (so thai: users can be billed) or simply for accumulating usage 
statistics. Usage statistics may be a valuable tool for researchers who wish 
to reconfigure the system to improve computing services. 
Protection and security. The owners of information stored in a multiuser or 
networked computer system may want to control use of that information. 
When. several separate processes execute concurrently, it ~hould not be 
possible for one process to interfere with the others or with the operating 
system itself. Protection iiwolves ensuring that all access to systerr1-
resources 1S -controlled. Security of the system from outsiders is also 
important. Such security starts with requiring each user to authenticate 
himself or herself to the system, usually by means of a password, to gain 
access to system resources. It extends to defending external I/0 devices, 

52 
Chapter 2 
2.2 
including modems and network adapters, from invalid access attempts 
and to recording all such connections for detection of break-ins. If a system 
is to be protected and secure, precautions must be instituted throughout 
it. A chain is only as strong as its weakest link. 
We mentioned earlier that there are several ways for users to interface with 
the operating system. Here, we discuss two fundamental approaches. One 
provides a command-line interface, or 
that allows users 
to directly enter commands to be performed by the operating system. The 
other allows users to interface with the operating system via a graphical user 
interface, or GUI. 
2.2.1 Command Interpreter 
Some operating systems include the command interpreter in the kernel. Others, 
such as Windows XP and UNIX, treat the command interpreter as a special 
program that is rmming when a job is initiated or when a user first logs on 
(on interactive systems). On systems with multiple command interpreters to 
choose from, the interpreters are known as shells. For example, on UNIX and 
Linux systems, a user may choose among several different shells, including 
the Bourne shell, C shell, Bourne-Again shell, Korn shell, and others. Third-party 
shells and free user-written shells are also available. Most shells provide similar 
functionality, and a user's choice of which shell to use is generally based on 
personal preference. Figure 2.2 shows the Bourne shell command interpreter 
being used on Solaris 10. 
The main function of the command interpreter is to get and execute the next 
user-specified command. Many of the commands given at this level manipulate 
files: create, delete, list, print, copy, execute, and so on. The MS-DOS and UNIX 
shells operate in this way. These commands can be implemented in two general 
ways. 
In one approach, the command interpreter itself contains the code to 
execute the command. For example, a command to delete a file may cause 
the command interpreter to jump to a section of its code that sets up the 
parameters and makes the appropriate system call. In this case, the number of 
comn'lands that can be given determines the size of the command interpreter, 
since each command requires its own implementing code. 
An alternative approach -used by UNIX, among other operating systems 
-implements most commands through system programs. In this case, the 
command interpreter does not understand the cmnmand in any way; it merely 
uses the command to identify a file to be loaded into memory and executed. 
Thus, the UNIX command to delete a file 
rm file.txt 
would search for a file called rm, load the file into memory, and execute it with 
the parameter file. txt. The function associated with the rm command would 
be defined completely by the code in the file rm. In this way, programmers can 
add new commands to the system easily by creating new files with the proper 

0.0 
0.0 
r/s 
0.0 
0.6 
console 
2.2 
0.2 
0.0 
0.2 
0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0 
0 
extended device statistics 
w/s 
0.0 
0.0 
kr./s 
klv/s 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
1 ogi nell 
idle 
1SJ un0718days 
wai ·t actv 
svc_t 
9{tN 
1i~b 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
load average: 0.09, 0.11, 8.66 
JCPU 
PCPU 
what 
1 
/usr/bin/ssh-agent -- /usr/bi 
18 
4 w 
Figure 2.2 The Bourne shell command interpreter in Solaris I 0. 
53 
names. The command-interpreter program, which can be small, does not have 
to be changed for new commands to be added. 
2.2.2 Graphical User Interfaces 
A second strategy for interfacing with the operating system is through a user-
friendly graphical user interface, or CUI. Here, rather than entering commands 
directly via a command-line interface, users employ a mouse-based window-
and-nl.enu system characterized by a 
metaphor. The user moves the 
mouse to position its pointer on images, or 
on the screen (the desktop) 
that represent programs, files, directories, and system functions. Depending 
on the mouse pointer's location, clicking a button on the mouse can invoke a 
program, select a file or directory-known as a folder-or pull down a menu 
that contains commands. 
Graphical user interfaces first appeared due in part to research taking place 
in the early 1970s at Xerox PARC research facility. The first CUI appeared on 
the Xerox Alto computer in 1973. However, graphical interfaces became more 
widespread with the advent of Apple Macintosh computers in the 1980s. The 
user interface for the Macintosh operating system (Mac OS) has undergone 
various changes over the years, the most significant being the adoption of 
the Aqua interface that appeared with Mac OS X. Microsoft's first version of 
Windows-Version 1.0-was based on the addition of a CUI interface to the 
MS-DOS operating system. Later versions of Windows have made cosmetic 
changes in the appearance of the CUI along with several enhancements in its 
functionality, including Windows Explorer. 

54 
Chapter 2 
Traditionally, UNIX systencs have been dominated by command-line inter-
faces. Various GUl interfaces are available, however, including the Common 
Desktop Environment (CDE) and X-Windows systems, which are common 
on commercial versions of UNIX, such as Solaris and IBM's AIX system. In 
addition, there has been significant development in GUI designs from various 
projects, such as I< Desktop Environment (or KDE) and the GNOME 
desktop by the GNU project. Both the KDE and GNOME desktops run on Linux 
and various UNIX systems and are available under open-source licenses, which 
means their source code is readily available for reading and for modification 
under specific license terms. 
The choice of whether to use a command-line or GUI interface is mostly 
one of personal preference. As a very general rule, many UNIX users prefer 
command-line interfaces, as they often provide powerful shell interfaces. 
In contrast, most Windows users are pleased to use the Windows GUI 
environment and almost never use the MS-DOS shell interface. The various 
changes undergone by the Macintosh operating systems provide a nice study 
in contrast. Historically, Mac OS has not provided a command-line interface, 
always requiring its users to interface with the operating system using its GUI. 
However, with the release of Mac OS X (which is in part implemented using a 
UNIX kernel), the operating system now provides both a new Aqua interface 
and a command-line interface. Figure 2.3 is a screenshot of the Mac OS X GUI. 
The user interface can vary from system to system and even from user 
to user within a system. It typically is substantially removed from the actual 
system structure. The design of a useful and friendly user interface is therefore 
Figure 2.3 The Mac OS X GUI. 

2.3 
2.3 
55 
not a direct function of the operating systenc. In this book, we concentrate on 
the fundamental problems of providing adequate service to user programs. 
From the point of view of the operating system, we do not distinguish between 
user programs and systern programs. 
System calls provide an interface to the services made available by an operating 
system. These calls are generally available as routines written in C and 
C++, although certain low-level tasks (for example, tasks where hardware 
must be accessed directly), may need to be written using assembly-language 
instructions. 
Before we discuss how an operating system makes system calls available, 
let's first use an example to illustrate how system calls are used: writing a 
simple program to read data from one file and copy them to another file. The 
first input that the program will need is the names of the two files: the input file 
and the output file. These names can be specified in many ways, depending 
on the operating-system design. One approach is for the program to ask the 
user for the names of the two files. In an interactive system, this approach will 
require a sequence of system calls, first to write a prompting message on the 
screen and then to read from the keyboard the characters that define the two 
files. On mouse-based and icon-based systems, a menu of file names is usually 
displayed in a window. The user can then use the mouse to select the source 
name, and a window can be opened for the destination name to be specified. 
This sequence requires many I/0 system calls. 
Once the two file names are obtained, the program must open the input file 
and create the output file. Each of these operations requires another system call. 
There are also possible error conditions for each operation. When the program 
tries to open the input file, it may find that there is no file of that name or that 
the file is protected against access. In these cases, the program should print a 
message on the console (another sequence of system calls) and then terminate 
abnormally (another system call). If the input file exists, then we must create a 
new output file. We may find that there is already an output file with the same 
name. This situation may cause the program to abort (a system call), or we 
may delete the existing file (another system call) and create a new one (another 
system call). Another option, in an interactive system, is to ask the user (via 
a sequence of system calls to output the prompting message and to read the 
response from the termin.al) whether to replace the existing file or to abort the 
program. 
Now that both files are set up, we enter a loop that reads from the input 
file (a system call) and writes to the output file (another system call). Each read 
and write must return status information regarding various possible error 
conditions. On input, the program may find that the end of the file has been 
reached or that there was a hardware failure in the read (such as a parity error). 
The write operation may encounter various errors, depending on the output 
device (no more disk space, printer out of paper, and so on). 
Finally, after the entire file is copied, the program may close both files 
(another system call), write a message to the console or window (more 
system calls), and finally terminate normally (the final system call). As we 

56 
Chapter 2 
can see1 even simple programs may make heavy use of the operating system. 
Frequently/ systems execute thousands of system calls per second. This system-
call sequence is shown in Figure 2A. 
Most programmers never see this level of detail however. Typically/ appli-
caTiol1 developers design program.s accordir1g to an 
---·-----~Jl~J'I}. Tl1e AJ'Ispecifies a set of functions 
application programmer/ including the parameters that are passed to each 
function and the return values the programmer can expect. Three of the most 
common APis available to application programmers are the Win32 API for Win-
dows systems, the POSIX API for POSIX-based systems (which include virtually 
all versions of UNIX, Linux/ and Mac OS X), and the Java API for designing 
programs that run on the Java virtual machine. Note that-unless specified 
-the system-call names used throughout this text are generic examples. Each 
operating system has its own name for each system call. 
Behind the scenes/ the functions that make up an API typically invoke the 
actual system calls on behalf of the application programmer. For example, the 
Win32 function CreateProcess () (which unsurprisingly is used to create 
a new process) actually calls the NTCreateProcess () system call in the 
Windows kernel. Why would an application programnl.er prefer programming 
according to an API rather than invoking actual system calls? There are several 
reasons for doing so. One benefit of programming according to an API concerns 
program portability: An application programmer designing a program using 
an API can expect her program to compile and run on any system that supports 
the same API (although in reality/ architectural differences often make this 
more difficult than it may appear). Furthermore/ actual system calls can often 
be more detailed and difficult to work with than the API available to an 
application programmer. Regardless/ there often exists a strong correlation 
between a function in the API and its associated system call within the kernel. 
Example System Call Sequence 
Acquire input file name 
Write prompt to screen 
Accept input 
Acquire output file name 
Write prompt to screen 
Accept input 
Open the input file 
if file doesn't exist, abort 
Create output file 
if file exists, abort 
Loop 
Read from input file 
Write to output file 
Until. read fails 
Close output file 
Write completion message to screen 
Terminate normally 
Figure 2.4 Example of how system calls are used. 

2.3 
EXAMPLE OF STANDARD API 
As an example of a standard APT, consider the ReadFile 0 £unction in the 
Win32 API-a function for reading £rom a file. The API for this function 
appears in Figure 2.5 . 
.. · 
return value 
~ 
BOOL 
ReadFile c 
t 
function name 
(HANDLE 
LPVOID 
DWORD 
LPDWORD 
LPOVERLAPPED 
file, 
~ 
buffer, 
bytes To Read, 
parameters 
bytes Read, 
ovl); 
Figure 2.5 The API for the ReadFile () function. 
A description of the parameters passed to ReadFile 0 is as follows: 
HANDLE file-the file to be read 
LPVOID buffer-a buffer where the data will be read into and written 
from 
DWORD bytesToRead-the number of bytes to be read into the buffer 
LPDWORD bytesRead -the number of bytes read during the last read 
LPOVERLAPPED ovl-indicates if overlapped I/0 is being used 
57 
In fact, many of the POSIX and Win32 APis are similar to the native system calls 
provided by the UNIX, Linux, and Windows operating systems. 
The run-time support system (a set of functions built into libraries included 
with a compiler) for most programming languages provides a system-call 
interface that serves as the link to system calls made available by the operating 
system. The system-call interface intercepts function calls in the API and 
invokes the necessary system calls within the operating system. Typically, 
a number is associated with each system call, and the system-call interface 
maintains a table indexed according to these nun'lbers. The system call interface 
then invokes the intended system call in the operating-system kernel and 
returns the status of the system call and any return values. 
The caller need know nothing about how the system call is implemented or 
what it does during execution. Rathel~ it need only obey the API and understand 
what the operating system will do as a result of the execution of that system 
calL Thus, most of the details of the operating-system interface are hidden from 
the programmer by the API and are managed by the run-time support library. 
The relationship between an API, the system-call interface, and the operating 

58 
Chapter 2 
2.4 
user 
mode 
kernel 
mode 
user application 
opeo () ( 
J 
open () 
Implementation 
of open () 
system call 
return 
Figure 2.6 The handling of a user application invoking the open() system call. 
system is shown in Figure 2.6, which illustrates how the operating system 
handles a user application invoking the open() system call. 
System calls occur in different ways, depending onthe COJ:rlpl1te.rjJlll§e. 
Often, more information is required than simply the identity of the desired 
system call. The exact type and ammmt of information vary according to the 
particular operating system and call. For example, to get input, we may need 
to specify the file or device to use as the source, as well as the address and 
length of the memory buffer into which the input should be read. Of course, 
the device or file and length may be implicit in the call. 
Three general methods are used to pass parameters to the operating 
system. The simplest approach is to pass the param.eters in registers. In some 
cases, however, there may be more parameters than registers. In these cases, 
the parameters are generally stored in a block, or table, in memory, and the 
address of the block is passed as a parameter in a register (Figure 2.7). This 
is the approach taken by Linux and Solaris. Parameters also can be placed, or 
pushed, onto the stack by the program and popped oH the stacl( by the operatirl:g 
~yste111: Some operating syste1ns prefer the block or stack method because those 
approaches do not limit the number or length of parameters being passed. 
System calls can be grouped ~oughly intc) six major categories: process 
control, file manipuJation, device manipulation, information maintenance, 
coinmuiii~a1ioii.~; <:lndpr{}tediol}. In Seci:lo:ri.s 2.4.l.~Hi.i=o~l.gli 2.L[6~·we diSCllSS 
briefly the types of system calls that may be provided by an operating system. 
Most of these system calls support, or are supported by, concepts and functions 

X: parameters 
for call 
load address X 
system call 13 +-~---
user program 
2.4 
register 
operating system 
Figure 2.7 Passing of parameters as a table. 
59 
that are discussed in later chapters. Figure 2.8 summarizes the types of system 
calls normally provided by an operating system. 
2.4.1 Process Control 
A running program needs to be able to halt its execution either normally (end) 
or abnormally (abort). If a system call is made to terminate the currently 
ruru1il1g program abnormally, or if the program runs into a problem and 
causes an error trap, a dump of memory is sometimes taken and an error 
message generated. The dump is written to disk and may be examined by a 
system program designed to aid the programmer in finding and 
correcting bugs-to determine the cause of the problem. Under either normal 
or abnormal circumstances, the operating system must transfer control to the 
invoking command mterpreter. The command interpreter then reads the next 
cominand. In an interactive system, the command interpreter simply continues 
with the next command; it is assumed that the user will issue an appropriate 
command to respond to any error. In a GUI system, a pop-up wmdow might 
alert the user to the error and ask for guidance. In a batch system, the command 
interpreter usually terminates the entire job and continues with the next job. 
Some systems allow control cards to indicate special recovery actions in case 
an error occurs. A 
is a batch-system concept. It is a command to 
manage the execution of a process. If the program discovers an error in its input 
and wants to terminate abnormally, it may also want to define an error level. 
More severe errors can be indicated by a higher-level error parameter. It is then 
possible to combi11e normal and abnormal termination by defining a normal 
termination as an error at level 0. The command interpreter or a following 
program can use this error level to determine the next action automatically. 
A process or jobexecuting one P!()gral11_11l<:ly __ \;\'(ll1tto Joad andexecut~ 
anotEer pro-gra1:n:.-Th1s feafl:11:e allows the cmnmand i11terpreter to execute a 
program as directed by, for example, a user command, the click of a mouse, 
or a batch command. An interesting question is where to return control when 
the loaded program terminates. This question is related to the problem of 

60 
Chapter 2 
Process control 
o end, abort 
o load, execute 
o create process, terminate process 
o get process attributes, set process attributes 
o wait for time 
o wait event, signal event 
o allocate and free memory 
File management 
o create file, delete file 
o open, close 
o read, write, reposition 
o get file attributes, set file attributes 
e: Device management 
o request device, release device 
o read, write, reposition 
o get device attributes, set device attributes 
o logically attach or detach devices 
Information maintenance 
o get time or date, set time or date 
o get system data, set system data 
o get process, file, or device attributes 
o set process, file, or device attributes 
Communications 
o create, delete communication connection 
o send, receive messages 
o transfer status information 
o attach or detach remote devices 
Figure 2.8 Types of system calls. 
whether the existing program is lost, saved, or allowed to continue execution 
concurrently with the new program. 
If control returns to the existing program when the new program termi-
nates, we must save the memory image of the existing program; thus, we have 
effectively created a mechanism for one program to call another program. If 
both programs continue concurrently, we have created a new job or process to 

2.4 
61 
EXAMPLES OF WINDOWS AND UNIX SYSTEM CALLS 
Windows 
Unix 
Process 
CreateProcessO 
fork() 
Control 
Exi tProcess () 
exit() 
WaitForSingleObject() 
wait() 
File 
CreateFile () 
open() 
Manipulation 
ReadFile() 
read() 
WriteFile () 
write() 
CloseHandle () 
close() 
Device 
SetConsoleMode() 
ioctl() 
Manipulation 
ReadConsole() 
read() 
WriteConsole() 
write() 
Information 
GetCurrentProcessiD() 
getpid() 
Maintenance 
SetTimerO 
alarm() 
Sleep() 
sleep() 
Communication 
CreatePipe () 
pipe() 
CreateFileMapping() 
shmget() 
MapViewOfFile () 
mmapO 
Protection 
SetFileSecurity() 
chmod() 
InitlializeSecurityDescriptor() 
umask() 
SetSecurityDescriptorGroup() 
chown() 
be multi programmed. Often, there is a system call specifically for this purpose 
(create process or submit job). 
If we create a new job or process, or perhaps even a set of jobs or processes, 
we should be able to control its execution. This control requires the ability 
to determine and reset the attributes of a job or process, including the job's 
priority, its maximum allowable execution time, and so on (get process 
attributes and set process attributes). We may also want to terminate 
a job or process that we created (terminate process) if we find that it is 
incorrect or is no longer needed. 
Having created new jobs or processes, we may need to wait for them 
to finish their execution. We may want to wait for a certain amount of time 
to pass (wait time); more probably, we will want to wait for a specific event to 
occur (wait event). The jobs or processes should then signal when that event 
has occurred (signal event). Quite often, two or more processes may share 
data. To ensure the integrity of the data being shared, operating systems often 
provide system calls allowing a process to lock shared data, thus preventing 
another process from accessing the data while it is locked. Typically such 
system calls include acquire lock and release lock. System calls of these 

62 
Chapter 2 
EXAMPLE OF STANDARD C LIBRARY 
The standard C library provides a portion o£ the system-call interface for 
many versions of UNIX and Linux. As an example, let's assume a C program 
invokes the printf () statement The C library intercepts this call and 
invokes the necessary system call(s) in the operating system-in this instance, 
the write() system call. The C library takes the value returned by write() 
and passes it back to the user program. This is shown in Figure 2.9. 
user 
mode 
kernel 
mode 
I 
I 
#include <stdio.h> 
int main () 
{ 
-
printf ("Greetings"); I+ 
return 0; 
standard C library 
write ( ) 
system call 
I 
I 
) 
Figure 2.9 
Standard C library handling of write(). 
types, dealilcg with the coordination of concurrent processes, are discussed in 
great detail in Chapter 6. 
There are so many facets of and variations in process and job control that 
we next use two examples-one involving a single-tasking system and the 
other a multitasking system -to clarify these concepts. The MS-DOS operating 
system is an example of a single-tasking system. It has a command interpreter 
that is invoked when the computer is started (Figure 2.10(a)). Because MS-DOS 
is single-tasking, it uses a sincple method to run a program and does not create 
a new process. It loads the program into memory, writing over most of itself to 
give the program as much memory as possible (Figure 2.10(b)). Next, it sets the 
instruction pointer to the first instruction of the program. The program then 
runs, and either an error causes a trap, or the program executes a system call 
to terminate. In either case, the error code is saved in the system memory for 
later use. Following this action, the small portion of the command interpreter 
that was not overwritten resumes execution. Its first task is to reload the rest 

free memory 
command 
interpreter 
(a) 
2.4 
free memory 
process 
command 
interpreter 
(b) 
Figure 2.10 MS-DOS execution. (a) At system startup. (b) Running a program. 
63 
of the command interpreter from disk Then the command interpreter makes 
the previous error code available to the user or to the next program. 
Fre~_J?_S_I)(der_i_\'~c!Jr()In B(:>J,"~eley UNIX) is an example of a multitasking 
syst(:'~ When a user logs on to the system~ the shell oTthe user's-choice-
is run. This shell is similar to the MS-DOS shell in that it accepts commands 
and executes programs that the user requests. However, since FreeBSD is a 
multitasking system, the command interpreter may continue running while 
another program is executed (Figure 2.11). Io startanew:__process,_th_es1w1L 
execu~£2\_:for-k()sy~tem call. Then, the selected program is loaded into 
memory via an exec() system call, and the program is executed. Depending 
on the way the command was issued, the shell then either waits for the process 
to finish or runs the process "in the background." In the latter case, the shell 
immediately requests another command. When a process is rmming in the 
background, it cannot receive input directly fron1. the keyboard, because the 
process D 
free memory 
process c 
interpreter 
Figure 2.11 
FreeBSD running multiple programs. 

64 
Chapter 2 
shell is using this resource. I/O is therefore done through files or through a CUI 
interface. Meanwhile, the user is free to ask the shell to run other programs, to 
monitor the progress of the running process, to change that program's priority, 
and so on. When the process is done, it executes an exit () system call to 
terminate, returning to the invoking process a status code of 0 or a nonzero 
error code. This status or error code is then available to the shell or other 
programs. Processes are discussed in Chapter 3 with a program example using 
thefork() and exec() systemcalls. 
2.4.2 File Management 
The file system is discussed in more detail in Chapters 10 and 11. We can, 
however, identify several common system calls dealing with files. 
We first need to be able to create and delete files. Either system call 
requires the name of the file and perhaps some of the file's attributes. Once the 
file is created, we need to open it and to use it. We may also read, write, or 
reposition (rewinding or skipping to the end of the file, for example). Finally, 
we need to close the file, indicating that we are no longer using it. 
We may need these same sets of operations for directories if we have a 
directory structure for organizing files in the file system. In addition, for either 
files or directories, we need to be able to determine the values of various 
attributes and perhaps to reset them if necessary. File attributes include the 
file name, file type, protection codes, accounting information, and so on. At 
least two system calls, get file attribute and set file attribute, are 
required for this function. Some operating systems provide many more calls, 
such as calls for file move and copy. Others might provide an API that performs 
those operations using code and other system calls, and others might just 
provide system programs to perform those tasks. If the system programs are 
callable by other programs, then each can be considered an API by other system 
programs. 
2.4.3 Device Management 
A process may need several resources to execute-main memory, disk drives, 
access to files, and so on. If the resources are available, they can be granted, 
and control can be returned to the user process. Otherwise, the process will 
have to wait until sufficient resources are available. 
The various resources controlled by the operating system can be thought 
of as devices. Some of these devices are physical devices (for example, disk 
drives), while others can be thought of as abstract or virtual devices (for 
example, files). A system with multiple users may require us to first request 
the device, to ensure exclusive use of it. After we are finished with the device, 
we release it. These functions are similar to the open and close system 
calls for files. Other operating systems allow Llnmanaged access to devices. 
The hazard then is the potential for device contention and perhaps deadlock, 
which is described in Chapter 7. 
Once the device has been requested (and allocated to us), we can read, 
write, and (possibly) reposition the device, just as we can with files. In fact, 
the similarity between I/0 devices and files is so great that many operating 
systems, including UNIX, merge the two into a combined file-device structure. 
In this case, a set of system calls is used on both files and devices. Sometimes, 

2.4 
65 
l/0 devices are identified by special file names, directory placement, or file 
attributes. 
The user interface can also ncake files and devices appear to be similar1 even 
though the underlying system calls are dissimilar. This is another example of 
the many design decisions that go into building an operating system and user 
interface. 
2.4.4 Information Maintenance 
Many system calls exist simply for the purpose of transferring information 
between the user program and the operating system. For example, most 
systems have a system call to return the current time and date. Other system 
calls may return information about the system, such as the number of current 
users, the version number of the operating system, the amount of free memory 
or disk space, and so on. 
Another set of system calls is helpful in debugging a program. Many 
systems provide system calls to dump memory. This provision is useful for 
debugging. A program trace lists each system call as it is executed. Even 
microprocessors provide a CPU mode known as single step, in which a trap is 
executed by the CPU after every instruction. The trap is usually caught by a 
debugger. 
Many operating systems provide a time profile of a program to indicate 
the amount of time that the program executes at a particular location or set 
of locations. A time prof~~~~(C_92:1i!~~~i!!'ceE a t~(lC~Ki2l<:ility_S?E!:egl1lar _tii"!'_eE 
interrupts. At every occurrence of the timer interrupt, the value of the program 
c6l-i:i~te1·-ls recorded. With sufficiently frequent timer interrupts, a statistical 
picture of the time spent on various parts of the program can be obtained. 
In addition, the operating system keeps information about all its processes, 
and system calls are used to access this information. Generally, calls are 
also used to reset the process information (get process attributes and 
set process attributes). In Section 3.1.3, we discuss what information is 
normally kept. 
2.4.5 Communication 
Th~~e~e two C()ll1l~cJ:JI1 __ mod_e_l~_()fi!'!e_!El·()_c~ss_col'rll"!'~~nica tion: the .. l"!'~ssag_e::_ 
passing model and the shared-memory model. !nth~Il!~S~~g_e .. pa,s~iJ1gl"!'()'leL 
t_l:t_~_C():rrtll12InJfa_fii~gpr§c~~§:~~-e)(c£lailg~ Il'l-es~~ges with one another to transfer 
i:tcfo_rillaJi()J}. Messages can be exchanged between the processes either directly 
or indirectly through a common mailbox. Before communication can take 
place, a connection must be opened. The name of the other communicator 
must be known, be it another process on the same system or a process on 
another computer comcected by a communications network. Each computer 
in a network has a host name by which it is commonly known. A host also 
has a network identifier, such as an IP address. Similarly, each process has 
a process narne, and this name is translated into an identifier by which the 
operating systemcanrefertotheprocess. The get hostidand get processid 
system calls do this translation. The identifiers are then passed to the general-
purpose open and close calls provided by the file system or to specific 
open connection and close connection system calls, depending on the 
system's model of communication. The recipient process usually must give its 

66 
Chapter 2 
2.5 
permission for comnmnication to take place with an accept connection call. 
Most processes that will be receiving connections are special-purpose daemons, 
which are systems programs provided for that purpose. They execute a wait 
for connection call and are awakened when a connection is rna de. The source 
of the communication, known as the client, and the receiving daenwn, known as 
a server, then exchange messages by using read message and write message 
system calls. The close connection call terminates the communication. 
_!11 the shared-me_1llorytllodel,proc~sses use s:tlared memorycreate and 
shared memory attach system calls to create 2rt1d gain access toi·egions oT 
n1emory owned by other processes. Recall that, normally, the operatinisystein 
hiesf() prevei1foiie process-from accessing another process's memory. Shared 
memory requires that two or more processes agree to remove this restriction. 
They can then exchange information by reading and writing data in the shared 
areas. The form of the data is determined by the processes and are not under 
the operating system's control. The processes are also responsible for ensuring 
that they are not writing to the same location sirnultaneously. Such mechanisms 
are discussed in Chapter 6. In Chapter 4, we look at a variation of the process 
scheme-threads-in which memory is shared by default. 
Both of the models just discussed are common in operating systems, 
and most systems implement both. Message passing is useful for exchanging 
smaller amounts of data, because no conflicts need be avoided. It is also easier to 
implement than is shared memory for intercomputer communication. Shared 
memory allows maximum speed and convenience of communication, since it 
can be done at memory transfer speeds when it takes place within a computer. 
Problems exist, however, in the areas of protection and synchronization 
between the processes sharing memory. 
2.4.6 Protection 
Protection provides a mechanism for controlling access to the resources 
provided by a computer system. Historically, protection was a concern only on 
multiprogrammed computer systems with several users. However, with the 
advent of networking and the Internet, all computer systems, from servers to 
PDAs, must be concerned with protection. 
Typically, system calls providing protection include set permission and 
get permission, which manipulate the permission settings of resources 
such as files and disks. The allow user and deny user system calls spec-
ify whether particular users can-or cannot-be allowed access to certain 
resources. 
We cover protection in Chapter 14 and the much larger issue of security in 
Chapter 15. 
Another aspect of a modern system is the collection of system programs. Recall 
Figure 1.1, which depicted the logical computer hierarchy. At the lowest level is 
hardware. Next is the operating system, then the system programs, and finally 
the application programs. System programs, also known as system utilities, 
provide a convenient enviromnenf1orprograrn-aevelopmeiiTa1inexecuhon. 

2.5 
67 
Some of them are simply user interfaces to system calls; others are considerably 
more complex. They can be divided into these categories: 
File management. These programs create, delete, copy, rename, print, 
dump, list, and generally ncanipulate files and directories. 
Status information. Some programs simply ask the system for the date, 
time, amount of available memory or disk space, number of users, or 
similar status information. Others are more complex, providing detailed 
performance, logging, and debugging information. Typically, these pro-
grams format and print the output to the terminal or other output devices 
or files or display it in a window of the GUI. Some systems also support a 
which is used to store and retrieve configuration information. 
File modification. Several text editors may be available to create and 
modify the content of files stored on disk or other storage devices. There 
may also be special commands to search contents of files or perform 
transformations of the text. 
Programming-language support. Compilers, assemblers, debuggers, and 
interpreters for common programming languages (such as C, C++, Java, 
Visual Basic, and PERL) are often provided to the user with the operating 
system. 
Program loading and execution. Once a program is assembled or com-
piled, it must be loaded into memory to be executed. The system may 
provide absolute loaders, relocatable loaders, linkage editors, and overlay 
loaders. Debugging systems for either higher-level languages or machine 
language are needed as well. 
Communications. These programs provide the mechanism for creating 
virtual comcections among processes, users, and computer systems. They 
allow users to send rnessages to one another's screens, to browse Web 
pages, to send electronic-mail messages, to log in remotely, or to transfer 
files from one machine to another. 
In addition to systems programs, most operating systems are supplied 
with programs that are useful in solving common problems or performing 
common operations. Such application]JJ:"Ogr!lJ1lS iitclLlde'if\T~l:l l:Jrg_wsf2r~, worg 
processors an<i text f6-rinattEis,spreadsheets, database systems, compilers, 
plott1i1g ana s-tafistica]-analysis packages, ancl gan1es~ - -- -
- --------
-----
___ Tne viewoClne Opei;ating-sysrerri-seen b)T inost users is defined by the 
application and system programs, rather than by the actual systern calls. 
Consider a user's PC. When a user's computer is rumcing the Mac OS X 
operating system, the user might see the GUI, featuring a mouse-and-windows 
interface. Alternatively, or even in one of the windows, the user might have 
a command-line UNIX shell. Both use the same set of system calls, but the 
system calls look different and act in different ways. Further confusing the 
user view, consider the user dual-booting from Mac OS X into Windows Vista. 
Now the same user on the same hardware has two entirely different interfaces 
and two sets of applications using the same physical resources. On the same 

68 
Chapter 2 
2.6 
hardware, then, a user can be exposed to multiple user interfaces sequentially 
or concurrently. 
In this section, we discuss problems we face in designing and implementing an 
operating system. There are, of course, no complete solutions to such problems, 
but there are approaches that have proved successful. 
2.6.1 
Design Goals 
The first problem in designing a system is to define goals and specifications. 
At the highest level, the design of the system will be affected by the choice of 
hardware and the type of system: batch, time shared, single user, multiuser, 
distributed, real time, or general purpose. 
Beyond this highest design level, the requirements may be much harder to 
specify. The requirements can, however, be divided into two basic groups: user 
goals and system goals. 
Users desire certain obvious properties in a system. The system should be 
convenient to use, easy to learn and to use, reliable, safe, and fast. Of course, 
these specifications are not particularly useful in the system design, since there 
is no general agreement on how to achieve them. 
A similar set of requirements can be defined by those people who must 
design, create, maintain, and operate the system. The system should be easy to 
design, implement, and maintain; and it should be flexible, reliable, error free, 
and efficient. Again, these requirements are vague and may be interpreted in 
various ways. 
There is, in short, no unique solution to the problem of defining the 
requirements for an operating system. The wide range of systems in existence 
shows that different requirements can result in a large variety of solutions for 
different environments. For example, the requirements for VxWorks, a real-
time operating system for embedded systems, must have been substantially 
different from those for MVS, a large multiuser, multiaccess operating system 
for IBM mainframes. 
Specifying and designing an operating system is a highly creative task. 
Although no textbook can tell you how to do it, general principles have 
been developed in the field of software engineering, and we turn now to 
a discussion of some of these principles. 
c 
-
2.6.2 Mechanisms and Policies 
., 
I 
One important principle is the separation of policy from mechanisiil~echa:: 
1'lis~s (:leter111il1e hcnu !Q_c:@-son'l~tl-til1g; p()lic:les (i~termir<e . zul1dT wilCbe done. 
For example, the timer construct (see Section 1.5.2) is a mechani.sril:-forensill1ng 
CPU protection, but deciding how long the timer is to be set for a particular 
user is a policy decision. 
_]'h~_S_§122l!Cl_tig!l:()fP.Qli_cy_an_ci~T1_echanism is imp()rtant for flexibility. Policies 
are likely to change across places o1:'over- time. 'rri tll'e worst case, each change 
in policy would require a change in the underlying mechanism. A general 
mechanism insensitive to changes in policy would be more desirable. A change 

2.6 
69 
in policy would then require redefinition of only certain parameters of the 
system. For instance, consider a mechanism for giving priority to certain types 
of programs over others. If the mechanism. is properly separated from policy, 
it can be used either to support a policy decision that I/O-intensive progran1.s 
should have priority over CPU-intensive ones or to support the opposite policy. 
Microkernel=based operati1lg sy_sh:~ms(Section 2-?.3)take the separation of 
mechai~1Sinai~Cfp?Hcyto one extreme byimplementing a basicset()j_pri111.iti_y~ 
1Jiwding bfocks. These blocks are almost policy free, allowing more advanced 
-1necharnsms and policies to be added via user-created kernel modules or via 
user programs themselves. As an example, consider the history of UNIX. At 
first, it had a time-sharing scheduler. In the latest version of Solaris, scheduling 
is controlled by loadable tables. Depending on the table currently loaded, 
the system can be time shared, batch processing, real time, fair share, or 
any combination. Making the scheduling mechanism general purpose allows 
vast policy changes to be made with a single load-new-table command. At 
th_~ ()th~r extreme is_il_~~~t~l"Il ~:ttC:l~-as _\1\t'i_!l_t:l()!YJ'c_~ \1\T~~icJ:l ~Qt~ J1"leC:!'.c:l~~~1l~ 
and_p()_1i_c_y__a_:r~_epc:()ciec:lj~1._!he sy~te~_ t(J_e_Ilforce__~gl()~~l()Ok an_cl_ fe_eL All 
applications have similar interfaces, because the interface itself is built into 
the kernel and system libraries. The Mac OS X operating system has similar 
functionality. 
Policy decisions are important for all resource allocation. Whenever it is 
necessary to decide whether or not to allocate a resource, a policy decision must 
be made. Whenever the question is how rather than what, it is a mechanism that 
must be determined. 
2.6.3 Implementation 
Once an operating system is designed, it must be implemented. Traditionally, 
operating systems have been written in assembly language. Now, however, 
they are most commonly written in higher-level languages such as Cor C++. 
The first system that was not written in assembly language was probably 
the Master Control Program (MCP) for Burroughs computers. MCP was written 
in a variant of ALGOL. MULTICS, developed at MIT, was written mainly in 
PL/1. The Linux and Windows XP operating systems are written mostly in C, 
although there are some small sections of assembly code for device drivers and 
for saving and restoring the state of registers. 
The advantages of using a higher-level language, or at least a systems-
implementation language, for implementing operating systems are the same 
as those accrued when the language is used for application programs: the 
code can be written faster, is more compact, and is easier to understand and 
debug. In addition, improvements in compiler technology will improve the 
generated code for the entire operating system by simple recompilation. Finally, 
an operating system is far easier to port-to move to some other hardware-if 
it is written in a higher-level language. For example, MS-DOS was written in Intel 
8088 assembly language. Consequently, it runs natively only on the Intel X86 
family of CPUs. (Although MS-DOS runs natively only on Intel X86, emulators 
of the X86 instruction set allow the operating system to run non-natively-
slower, with more resource use-on other CPUs. 
are programs that 
duplicate the functionality of one system with another system.) The Linux 

70 
Chapter 2 
2.7 
operating system, in contrast, is written mostly inC and is available natively on 
a number of different CPUs, including Intel X86, Sun SPARC, and IBMPowerPC. 
The only possible disadvantages of implementing an operating system in a 
higher-level language are reduced speed and increased storage requirements. 
This, howeve1~ is no longer a major issue in today's systems. Although an 
expert assembly-language programmer can produce efficient small routines, 
for large programs a modern compiler can perform complex analysis and apply 
sophisticated optimizations that produce excellent code. Modern processors 
have deep pipelining and n1.ultiple functional units that can handle the details 
of complex dependencies much more easily than can the human mind. 
As is true in other systems, major performance improvements in operating 
systems are more likely to be the result of better data structures and algorithms 
than of excellent assembly-language code. In addition, although operating sys-
tems are large, only a small amount of the code is critical to high performance; 
the memory manager and the CPU scheduler are probably the most critical rou-
tines. After the system is written and is working correctly, bottleneck routines 
can be identified and can be replaced with assembly-language equivalents. 
A system as large and complex as a modern operating system must be 
engineered carefully if it is to function properly and be modified easily. A 
common approach is to partition the task into small components rather than 
have one monolithic system. Each of these modules should be a well-defined 
portion of the system, with carefully defined inputs, outputs, and functions. 
We have already discussed briefly in Chapter 1 the common components 
of operating systems. In this section, we discuss how these components are 
interconnected and melded into a kernel. 
2.7.1 Simple Structure 
Many commercial operating systen1.s do not have well-defined structures. 
Frequently, such systems started as small, simple, and limited systems and 
then grew beyond their original scope. MS-DOS is an example of such a systen1.. 
It was originally designed and implemented by a few people who had no 
idea that it would become so popular. It was written to provide the most 
functionality in the least space, so it was not divided into modules carefully. 
Figure 2.12 shows its structure. 
In MS-DOS, the interfaces and levels of functionality are not wellseparated. 
For rnstai1.ce, appii.cat1on programs aie able to access the basic I) b 1:outiri.es 
to write directly to the display and disk drives. Such freedom leaves MS-DOS 
vulnerable to errant (or malicio"LlS) programs, causing entire system crashes 
when user programs fail. Of course, MS-DOS was also limited by the hardware 
of its era. Because the Intel 8088 for which it was written provides no dual 
mode and no hardware protection, the designers of MS-DOS had no choice but 
to leave the base hardware accessible. 
Another example of limited structuring is the original UNIX operating 
systein. Like MS~Dc5S, UNix initially was limited· by hard ware ft1il.cfionali.ty. ft 
consistsoftwo separahlepai;fS: thei<:eril.el ai1d the system prograrns:·Thekei:nel 

2.7 
71 
ROM BIOS device drivers 
Figure 2.12 MS-DOS layer structure. 
is further separated into a series of interfaces and device drivers, which have 
been added and expanded over the years as UNIX has evolved. We can view the 
traditional UNIX operating system as being layered, as shown in Figure 2.13. 
Everything below the system-call interface and above the physical hardware 
is the kernel. Tb~l<(Ol"ll~Lp:rgvides__i:h~_fil~syste:rn, C::P_l!_s~h~duLiJl,g, memory 
management, and other operating-system fm1ctions through system calls. 
Taken i.n sum~thatl.sai1 enormous an1ol.lnt of functionality to be combined into 
one level. This monolithic structure was difficult to implement and maintain. 
2.7.2 Layered Approach 
Withproper J:tarc:l\A!<lre support, operating systems can be brokeninto pieces 
that are smaller and more app1:opriate thar:t}hose allowed by the _ _2!i2;g~af 
(the users) 
shells and commands 
compilers and. interpreters 
system libraries 
signals terminal 
handling 
character 1/0 system 
terminal drivers 
file system 
swapping block 1/0 
system 
disk and tape drivers 
CPU scheduling 
page replacement 
demand paging 
virtual memory 
Figure 2.13 Traditional UNIX system structure. 

72 
Chapter 2 
Figure 2.14 A layered operating system. 
M~-:.QOi'ilncil]l'J_IX systeill~· The operating system can then retain much greater 
control over the computer and over the applications that make use of that 
computer. Implementers have more freedom in changing the inner workin.gs 
of the system and in creating modular operating systems. Under a top-
down approach, the overall functionality and features are determined and 
are separated into components. Information hiding is also important, because 
it leaves programmers free to implement the low-level routines as they see fit, 
provided that the external interface of the routine stays unchanged and that 
the routine itself performs the advertised task. 
A system can be made modular in many ways. Qne method is the layered 
approach, in which the operating system is broken ii1to a 1l.umberoflayers 
""(lever8J.TI1eoottom.Iiiyer.(layer 0).1stheTiarawai;e; the nig:Ytesl: (layerN) .. 1sfhe 
user interface. This layering structure is depicted in Figure 2.14. 
An operating-system layer is an implementation of an abstract object made 
up of data and the operations that can manipulate those data. A typical 
operating-system layer-say, layer M -consists of data structures and a set 
of routines that can be invoked by higher-level layers. Layer M, in turn, can 
invoke operations on lower-level layers. 
The main advantage of the layered approach is simplicity of construction 
and debugging. The layers are selected so that each uses functions (operations) 
and services of only lower-level layers. This approach simplifies debugging 
and .system verification. The first layer can be debugged without any concern 
for the rest of the system, because, by definition, it uses only the basic hardware 
(which is assumed correct) to implement its functions. Once the first layer is 
debugged, its correct functioning can be assumed while the second layer is 
debugged, and so on. If an error is found during the debugging of a particular 
layer, the error must be on that layer, because the layers below it are already 
debugged. Thus, the design and implementation of the system are simplified. 

2.7 
73 
Each layer is implemented with only those operations provided by lower-
level layers. A layer does not need to know how these operations are 
implemented; it needs to know only what these operations do. Hence, each 
layer hides the existence of certain data structures, operations, and hardware 
from higher-level layers. 
The major difficulty with the layered approach involves appropriately 
defining the various layers. Because a layer can use only lower-level layers, 
careful planning is necessary. For example, the device driver for the backing 
store (disk space used by virtual-memory algorithms) must be at a lower 
level than the memory-management routines, because memory management 
requires the ability to use the backing store. 
Other requirements may not be so obvious. The backing-store driver would 
normally be above the CPU scheduler, because the driver may need to wait for 
I/0 and the CPU can be rescheduled during this time. However, on a large 
system, the CPU scheduler m.ay have more information about all the active 
processes than can fit in memory. Therefore, this u1.formation may need to be 
swapped u1. and out of memory, requiring the backu1.g-store driver routine to 
be below the CPU scheduler. 
A final problem with layered implementations is that they tend to be less 
efficient than other types. For instance, when a user program executes an I/0 
operation, it executes a system call that is trapped to the I/0 layer, which calls 
the memory-management laye1~ which in tum calls the CPU-scheduling layer, 
which is then passed to the hardware. At each layer, the parameters may be 
modified, data may need to be passed, and so on. Each layer adds overhead to 
the system call; the net result is a system call that takes longer than does one 
on a nonlayered system. 
These limitations have caused a small backlash against layering in recent 
years. Fewer layers with more functionality are beu1.g designed, providu1.g most 
of the advantages of modularized code while avoidu1.g the difficult problems 
of layer definition and interaction. 
2.7.3 Microkernels 
We have already seen that as UNIX expanded, the kernel became large 
and difficult to manage. In the mid-1980s, researchers at Carnegie Mellon 
University developed an operatu1.g system called Mach that modularized 
the kernel using the ~i~roke~ll:~_!_~EE1~()2lC:~~I.b~._gL~!b_()_<:!_0ructl.~~~~--t!~e 
operatingsystem by removing all nonessential cornponentsfrom thekemel and 
1mp~e_l?:l~-ll:!~~~itil~!?::t~~s-~~fe_l"Il~~~~rl.ls_~l:~i~\r~}:Jr()greili~~:· the.reslin is-a smarrei: 
kernel. There is little consensus regarding which services should remain u1. the 
kernel and which should be implemented in user space. Typically, however, 
microkernels provide minimal process and memory management, in addition 
to a communication facility. 
The main function of the micro kernel is to provide a communication facility 
between the client program and the various services that are also rum1.ing 
in user space. Communication is provided by message passing, which was 
described in Section 2.4.5. For example, if the client program wishes to access 
a file, it must interact with the file server. The client program and service never 
interact directly. Rathel~ they communicate indirectly by exchanging messages 
with the microkemel. 

74 
Chapter 2 
One benefit of the microkernel approach is ease of extending the operating 
system. All new services are added to user space and consequently do not 
require modification of the kernel. When the kernel does have to be modified, 
the changes tend to be fewer, because the microkernel is a smaller kernel. 
The resulting operating system is easier to port from one hardware design 
to another. The microkernel also provides more security and reliability, since 
most services are running as user-rather than kernel-processes. If a service 
fails, the rest of the operating system remains untouched. 
Several contemporary operating systems have used the microkernel 
approach. Tru64 UNIX (formerly Digital UNIX) provides a UNIX interface to the 
user, but it is implemented with a Mach kernel. The Mach kernel maps UNIX 
system calls into messages to the appropriate user-level services. The Mac OS 
X kernel (also known as Darwin) is also based on the Mach micro kernel. 
Another example is QNX, a real-time operating system. The QNX nl.icro-
kernel provides services for message passing and process scheduling. It also 
handles low-level network communication and hardware interrupts. All other 
services in QNX are provided by standard processes that run outside the kernel 
in user mode. 
Unfortunately, microkernels can suffer from performance decreases due 
to increased system function overhead. Consider the history of Windows NT. 
The first release had a layered microkernel organization. However, this version 
delivered low performance compared with that of Windows 95. Windows NT 
4.0 partially redressed the performance problem by moving layers from user 
space to kernel space and integrating them more closely. By the time Windows 
XP was designed, its architecture was more monolithic than microkernel. 
2.7.4 Modules 
Perhaps the best current methodology for operating-system design involves 
using object-oriented programming techniques to create a modular kernel. 
Here, the kernel has a set of core components and links in additional services 
either during boot time or during run time. Such a strategy uses dynamically 
loadable modules and is common in modern implementations of UNIX, such 
as Solaris, Linux, and Mac OS X. For example, the Solaris operating system 
structure, shown in Figure 2.15, is organized armmd a core kernel with seven 
types of loadable kernel modules: 
Scheduling classes 
File systems 
Loadable system calls 
Executable formats 
STREAMS modules 
Miscellaneous 
Device and bus drivers 
Such a design allows the kernel to provide core services yet also allows 
certain features to be implemented dynamically. For example, device and 

2.7 
file systems 
Figure 2.15 Solaris loadable modules. 
loadable 
system calls 
75 
bus drivers for specific hardware can be added to the kernel, and support 
for different file systems can be added as loadable modules. The overall 
result resembles a layered system in that each kernel section has defined, 
protected interfaces; but it is more flexible than a layered system in that any 
module can call any other module. Furthermore, the approach is like the 
microkernel approach in that the primary module has only core functions 
and knowledge of how to load and communicate with other modules; but it 
is more efficient, because modules do not need to invoke message passing in 
order to communicate. 
The Apple Mac OS X operating system uses a hybrid structure. It is a layered 
system in which one layer consists of the Mach microkernel. The structure of 
Mac OS X appears in Figure 2.16. The top layers include application environ-
ments and a set of services providing a graphical interface to applications. 
Below these layers is the kernel environment, which consists primarily of the 
Mach microkernel and the BSD kernel. Mach provides memory management; 
support for remote procedure calls (RPCs) and interprocess communication 
(IPC) facilities, including message passing; and thread scheduling. The BSD 
component provides a BSD command line interface, support for networking 
and file systems, and an implementation of POSIX APis, including Pthreads. 
kernel 
environment 
application environments 
and common services 
Figure 2.16 The Mac OS X structure. 

76 
Chapter 2 
2.8 
In addition to Mach and BSD, the kernel environment provides an I/0 kit for 
development of device drivers and dynamically loadable modules (which Mac 
OS X refers to as kernel extensions). As shown in the figure, applications and 
comn:10n services can make use of either the Mach or BSD facilities directly. 
The layered approach described in Section 2.7.2 is taken to its logical conclusion 
in the concept of a 
The fundamental idea behind a virtual 
machine is to abstract the hardware of a si11.gle computer (the CPU, memory, 
disk drives, network interface cards, and so forth) into several different 
execution environments, thereby creating the illusion that each separate 
execution environment is run.ning its own private computer. 
By using CPU scheduling (Chapter 5) and virtual-memory techniques 
(Chapter 9), an operating system 
can create the illusion that a process 
has its own processor with its own (virtual) memory. The virtual machine 
provides an interface that is identical to the underlying bare hardware. Each 
process is provided with a (virtual) copy of the underlying computer 
(Figure 2.17). Usually, the guest process is in fact an operating system, and 
that is how a single physical machine can run multiple operating systems 
concurrently, each in its own virtual machine. 
2.8.1 
History 
Virtual machines first appeared commercially on IBM mainframes via the VM 
operating system in 1972. VM has evolved and is still available, and many of 
processes 
programming/ 
/ 
interface 
1----~-----1 
kernel 
(a) 
processes 
processes 
processes 
kernel 
kernel 
kernel 
VM1 
VM2 
VM3 
virtual-machine 
implementation 
(b) 
Figure 2.17 System models. (a) Nonvirtual machine. (b) Virtual machine. 

2.8 
77 
the original concepts are found in other systems, making this facility worth 
exploring. 
IBM VM370 divided a mainframe into nmltiple virtual machines, each 
numing its own operating system. A ncajor difficulty with the VM virtual-
machine approach involved disk systems. Suppose that the physical machine 
had three disk drives but wanted to support seven virtual machines. Clearly, it 
could not allocate a disk drive to each virtual machine, because the virtual-
machine software itself needed substantial disk space to provide virtual 
memory and spooling. The solution was to provide virtual disks-termed 
minidislcs in IBM's VM operating system -that are identical in all respects except 
size. The system implemented each minidisk by allocating as many tracks on 
the physical disks as the minidisk needed. 
Once these virtual machines were created, users could run any of the 
operating systems or software packages that were available on the underlying 
machine. For the IBM VM system, a user normally ran CMS-a single-user 
interactive operating system. 
2.8.2 Benefits 
There are several reasons for creating a virtual machine. Most of them are 
fundarnentally related to being able to share the same hardware yet run 
several different execution environments (that is, different operating systems) 
concurrently. 
One important advantage is that the host system is protected from the 
virtual machines, just as the virtual machines are protected from each other. A 
virus inside a guest operating system might damage that operating system but 
is unlikely to affect the host or the other guests. Because each virtual machine 
is completely isolated from all other virtual machines, there are no protection 
problems. At the same time, however, there is no direct sharing of resources. 
Two approaches to provide sharing have been implemented. First, it is possible 
to share a file-system volume and thus to share files. Second, it is possible to 
define a network of virtual machines, each of which can send information over 
the virtual communications network. The network is modeled after physical 
communication networks but is implemented in software. 
A virtual-machine system is a perfect vehicle for operating-systems 
research and development. Normally, changing an operating system is a diffi-
cult task. Operating systems are large and complex programs, and it is difficult 
to be sure that a change in one part will not cause obscure bugs to appear 
in some other part. The power of the operating system makes changing it 
particularly dangerous. Because the operating system executes in kernel mode, 
a wrong change in a pointer could cause an error that would destroy the entire 
file system. Thus, it is necessary to test all changes to the operating system 
carefully. 
The operating system, however, runs on and controls the entire machine. 
Therefore, tlle current system must be stopped and taken out of use while 
changes are made and tested. This period is comnconly called system-
development time. Since it makes the system unavailable to users, system-
development time is often scheduled late at night or on weekends, when system 
load is low. 

78 
Chapter 2 
A virtual-machine system can eliminate much of this problem. System 
programmers are given their own virtual machine, and system development is 
done on the virtual machine instead of on a physical machine. Normal system 
operation seldom needs to be disrupted for system development. 
Another advantage of virtual machines for developers is that multiple 
operating systems can be running on the developer's workstation concur-
rently. This virtualized workstation allows for rapid porting and testing of 
programs in varying enviromnents. Sin'lilarly, quality-assurance engineers can 
test their applications in multiple environments without buying, powering, 
and maintaining a computer for each environment. 
A major advantage of virtual machines in production data-center use is 
system 
which involves taking two or more separate systems 
and running them in virtual machines on one system. Such physical-to-virtual 
conversions result in resource optimization, as many lightly used systems can 
be combined to create one more heavily used system. 
If the use of virtual machines continues to spread, application deployment 
will evolve accordingly. If a system can easily add, remove, and move a 
virtual machine, then why install applications on that system directly? Instead, 
application developers would pre-install the application on a tuned and 
customized operating system in a virh1al machine. That virtual environment 
would be the release mechanism for the application. This method would be 
an improvement for application developers; application management would 
become easier, less tuning would required, and technical support of the 
application would be more straightforward. System administrators would 
find the environment easier to manage as well. Installation would be simple, 
and redeploying the application to another system would be much easier 
than the usual steps of uninstalling and reinstalling. For widespread adoption 
of this methodology to occur, though, the format of virtual machines must 
be standardized so that any virtual machine will run on any virtualization 
platform. The "Open Virtual Machine Format" is an attempt to do just that, 
and it could succeed in unifying virtual-machine formats. 
2.8.3 Simulation 
System virtualization as discussed so far is just one of many system-emulation 
methodologies. Virtualization is the most common because it makes guest 
operating systems and applications "believe" they are running on native 
hardware. Because only the system's resources need to be virtualized, these 
guests run at almost full speed. 
Another methodology is 
in which the host system has one 
system architecture and the guest system was compiled for a different archi-
tecture. For example, suppose a company has replaced its outdated computer 
system with a new system but would like to continue to run certain important 
programs that were compiled for the old system. The programs could be run 
in an e1nulator that translates each of the outdated system's instructions into 
the native instruction set of the new system. Emulation can increase the life of 
programs and allow us to explore old architectures without having an actual 
old machine, but its major challenge is performance. Instruction-set emulation 
can run an order of magnitude slower than native instructions. Thus, unless 
the new machine is ten times faster than the old, the program running on 

2.8 
79 
the new machine will run slower than it did on its native hardware. Another 
challenge is that it is difficult to create a correct emulator because, in essence, 
this involves writing an entire CPU in software. 
2.8.4 Para-virtualization 
is another vanat10n on this theme. Rather than try to 
trick a guest operating system into believing it has a system to itself, para-
virtualization presents the guest with a system that is similar but not identical 
to the guest's preferred system. The guest must be modified to run on the 
paravirtualized hardware. The gain for this extra work is more efficient use of 
resources and a smaller virtualization layer. 
Solaris 10 includes 
or 
that create a virtual layer between 
the operating system and the applications. In this system, only one kernel is 
installed, and the hardware is not virtualized. Rather, the operating system 
and its devices are virtualized, providing processes within a container with 
the impression that they are the only processes on the system. One or more 
containers can be created, and each can have its own applications, network 
stacks, network address and ports, user accounts, and so on. CPU resources 
can be divided up among the containers and the systemwide processes. Figure 
2.18 shows a Solaris 10 system with two containers and the standard "global" 
user space. 
user programs 
system programs 
CPU resources 
memory resources 
global zone 
user programs 
system programs 
network addresses 
device access 
CPU resources 
user programs 
system programs 
network addresses 
device access 
CPU resources 
memory resources 
memory resources 
zone 1 
zone 2 
virtual platform 
device management 
Figure 2.18 Solaris I 0 with two containers. 

80 
Chapter 2 
2.8.5 Implementation 
Although the virtual-machine concept is usefut it is difficult to implement. 
Much work is required to provide an exact duplicate of the underlying machine. 
Remember that the underlying machine typically has two modes: user mode 
and kernel mode. The virtual-machine software can run in kernel mode, since 
it is the operating system. The virtual machine itself can execute in only user 
mode. Just as the physical machine has two modes, however, so must the virtual 
machine. Consequently, we must have a virtual user mode and a virtual kernel 
mode, both of which run in a physical user mode. Those actions that cause a 
transfer from user mode to kernel mode on a real machine (such as a system 
call or an attempt to execute a privileged instruction) must also cause a transfer 
from virtual user mode to virtual kernel mode on a virtual machine. 
Such a transfer can be accomplished as follows. When a system calt for 
example, is made by a program running on a virtual machine in virtual user 
mode, it will cause a transfer to the virtual-machine monitor in the real machine. 
When the virtual-machine monitor gains controt it can change the register 
contents and program counter for the virtual machine to simulate the effect of 
the system calL It can then restart the virtual machine, noting that it is now in 
virtual kernel mode. 
The major difference, of course, is time. Whereas the real I/O might have 
taken 100 milliseconds, the virtual I/O might take less time (because it is 
spooled) or more time (because it is interpreted). In addition, the CPU is 
being multi programmed among many virtual machines, further slowing down 
the virtual machines in unpredictable ways. In the extreme case, it may be 
necessary to simulate all instructions to provide a true virtual machine. VM, 
discussed earlier, works for IBM machines because normal instructions for the 
virtual machines can execute directly on the hardware. Only the privileged 
instructions (needed mainly for I/0) must be simulated and hence execute 
more slowly. 
Without some level of hardware support, virtualization would be impos-
sible. The more hardware support available within a system, the more feature 
rich, stable, and well performing the virtual machines can be. All major general-
purpose CPUs provide some amount of hardware support for virtualization. 
For example, AMD virtualization technology is found in several AMD proces-
sors. It defines two new modes of operation-host and guest. Virtual machine 
software can enable host mode, define the characteristics of each guest virtual 
machine, and then switch the system to guest mode, passing control of the 
system to the guest operating system that is running in the virtual machine. 
In guest mode, the virtualized operating system thinks it is rum1.ing on native 
hardware and sees certain devices (those included in the host's definition of 
the guest). If the guest tries to access a virtualized resource, then control is 
passed to the host to manage that interaction. 
2.8.6 Examples 
Despite the advantages of virtual machines, they received little attention for 
a number of years after they were first developed. Today, however, virtual 
machines are coming into fashion as a means of solving system compatibility 
problems. In this section, we explore two popular contemporary virtual 
machines: the VMware Workstation and the Java virtual machine. As you 

2.8 
81 
will see, these virtual machines can typically run on top of operating systems 
of any of the design types discussed earlier. Thus, operating system design 
methods-simple layers, microkernels, n:wdules, and virtual machines-are 
not mutually exclusive. 
2.8.6.1 
VMware 
Most of the virtualization techniques discussed in this section require virtual-
ization to be supported by the kernel. Another method involves writing the 
virtualization tool to run in user mode as an application on top of the operating 
system. Virtual machines running within this tool believe they are rum<ing on 
bare hardware but in fact are running inside a user-level application. 
is a popular commercial application that abstracts 
Intel X86 and compatible hardware into isolated virtual machines. VMware 
Workstation runs as an application on a host operating system such as Windows 
or Linux and allows this host system to concurrently run several different guest 
operating systems as independent virtual machines. 
The architecture of such a system is shown in Figure 2.19. In this scenario, 
Linux is running as the host operating system; and FreeBSD, Windows NT, and 
Windows XP are rum<ing as guest operating systems. The virtualization layer is 
the heart of VMware, as it abstracts the physical hardware into isolated virtual 
machines running as guest operating systems. Each virtual machine has its 
own virtual CPU, memory, disk drives, network interfaces, and so forth. 
The physical disk the guest owns and manages is really just a file within the 
file system of the host operating system. To create an identical guest instance, 
we can simply copy the file. Copying the file to another location protects the 
guest instance against a disaster at the original site. Moving the file to another 
application 
application 
application 
application 
guest operating 
guest operating 
guest operating 
system 
system 
system 
(free BSD) 
(Windows NT) 
(Windows XP) 
virtual CPU 
virtual CPU 
virtual CPU 
virtual memory 
virtual memory 
virtual memory 
virtual devices 
virtual devices 
virtual devices 
virtualization layer 
hardware 
I· 
QPU· •.. ·•[ 
I r!Jemgfy 
Figure 2.19 VMware architecture. 

82 
Chapter 2 
location moves the guest system. These scenarios show how virtualization can 
improve the efficiency of system administration as well as system resource use. 
2.8.6.2 The Java Virtual Machine 
Java is a popular object-oriented programming language introduced by Sun 
Microsystems in 1995. In addition to a language specification and a large API 
library, Java also provides a specification for a Java virtual machine-or JVM. 
Java objects are specified with the class construct; a Java program 
consists of one or more classes. For each Java class, the compiler produces 
an architecture-neutral bytecode output (.class) file that will run on any 
implementation of the JVM. 
The JVM is a specification for an abstract computer. It consists of a class 
loader and a Java interpreter that executes the architecture-neutral bytecodes, 
as diagrammed in Figure 2.20. The class loader loads the compiled . class 
files from both the Java program and the Java API for execution by the Java 
interpreter. After a class is loaded, the verifier checks that the . class file is 
valid Java bytecode and does not overflow or underflow the stack It also 
ensures that the bytecode does not perform pointer arithmetic, which could 
provide illegal memory access. If the class passes verification, it is run by the 
Java interpreter. The JVM also automatically manages memory by performing 
garbage collection -the practice of reclaiming memory from objects no longer 
in use and returning it to the system. Much research focuses on garbage 
collection algorithms for increasing the performance of Java programs in the 
virtual machine. 
The JVM may be implemented in software on top of a host operating 
system, such as Windows, Linux, or Mac OS X, or as part of a Web browser. 
Alternatively, the JVM may be implemented in hardware on a chip specifically 
designed to nm Java programs. If the JVM is implemented in. software, the 
Java interpreter interprets the bytecode operations one at a time. A faster 
software technique is to use a just-in-time (JIT) compiler. Here, the first time a 
Java method is invoked, the bytecodes for the method are turned into native 
machine language for the host system. These operations are then cached so that 
subsequent invocations of a method are performed using the native machine 
instructions and the bytecode operations need not be interpreted all over again. 
A technique that is potentially even faster is to nm the JVM in hardware on a 
Java program 
.class files 
-•I class loader 1-+-
+ 
I 
Java I 
interpreter 
t 
host system 
(Windows, Linux, etc.) 
Figure 2.20 The Java virtual machine. 

2.8 
THE .NET FRAMEWORK 
The .NET Framework is a collection of technologies, including a set of class 
libraries, and an execution environment that come together to provide a 
platform for developing software. This platform allows programs to be 
written to target the .NET Framework instead of a specific architecture. A 
program written for the .NET Framework need not worry aboutthe specifics 
of the hardware or the operating system on which it will run. Thus, any 
architecture implementing .NET will be able to successfully execute the 
program. This is because the execution environment abstracts these details 
and provides a virtual machine as an intermediary between the executing 
program and the underlying architecture. 
At the core of the .NET Framework is the Common Language Runtime 
(CLR). The CLR is the implementation of the .NET virtual machine. Itprovides 
an environment for execution of programs written in any of the languages 
targeted at the .NET Framework. Programs written in languages such as 
C# (pronounced C-sharp) and VB.NET are compiled into an intermediate, 
architecture-independent language called Microsoft Intermediate Language 
(MS-IL). These compiled files, called assemblies, include MS-IL instructions 
and metadata. They have file extensions of either .EXE or .DLL. Upon 
execution of a program, the CLR loads assemblies into what .is known as 
the Application Domain. As instructions are requested by the executing 
program, the CLR converts the MS-IL instructions inside the assemblies into 
native code that is specific to the underlying architecture using just-in-time 
compilation. Once instructions have been converted to native code, they are 
kept and will continue to run as native code for the CPU. The architecture of 
the CLR for the .NET framework is shown in Figure 2.21. 
compilation 
CLR 
C++ 
source 
MS-IL 
assembly 
VB.Net 
source 
MS-IL 
assembly 
host system 
Figure 2.21 
ArchiteCture ofthe.CLR for the .NET Framework. 
83 

84 
Chapter 2 
2.9 
special Java chip that executes the Java bytecode operations as native code, thus 
bypassing the need for either a software interpreter or a just-in-tim.e compiler. 
Broadly, 
is the activity of finding and fixing errors, or 
in a 
system. Debugging seeks to find and fix errors in both hardware and software. 
Performance problems are considered bugs, so debugging can also include 
which seeks to improve performance by removing 
-""'-·"'-·-···" in the processing taking place within a system. A discussion of 
hardware debugging is outside of the scope of this text. In this section, we 
explore debugging kernel and process errors and performance problems. 
2.9.1 
Failure Analysis 
If a process fails, most operating systems write the error information to a 
to alert system operators or users that the problem occurred. The operating 
system can also take a 
capture of the memory (referred to as the 
"core" in the early days of computing) of the process. This core image is stored 
in a file for later analysis. Running programs and core dumps can be probed 
by a 
a tool designed to allow a programmer to explore the code and 
memory 
a process. 
Debugging user-level process code is a challenge. Operating system kernel 
debugging even more complex because of the size and complexity of the kernel, 
its control of the hardware, and the lack of user-level debugging tools. A kernel 
failure is called a 
As with a process failure, error information is saved to 
a log file, and the memory state is saved to a 
Operating system debugging frequently uses different tools and techniques 
than process debugging due to the very different nature of these two tasks. 
Consider that a kernel failure in the file-system code would make it risky for 
the kernel to try to save its state to a file on the file system before rebooting. 
A common technique is to save the kernel's memory state to a section of disk 
set aside for this purpose that contains no file system .. If the kernel detects 
an unrecoverable error, it writes the entire contents of memory, or at least the 
kernel-owned parts of the system memory, to the disk area. When the system 
reboots, a process runs to gather the data from that area and write it to a crash 
dump file within a file system for analysis. 
2.9.2 Performance Tuning 
To identify bottlenecks, we must be able to monitor system performance. Code 
must be added to compute and display measures of system behavior. In a 
number of systems, the operating system does this task by producing trace 
listings of system behavior. All interesting events are logged with their time and 
important parameters and are written to a file. Later, an analysis program can 
process the log file to determine system performance and to identify bottlenecks 
and inefficiencies. These same traces can be run as input for a simulation of 
a suggested improved system. Traces also can help people to find errors in 
operating-system behavior. 

2.9 
Kernighan's Law 
"Debugging is twice as hard as writing the code in the first place. Therefore, 
if you write the code as cleverly as possible, you are, by definition, not smart 
enough to debug it." 
85 
Another approach to performance tuning is to include interactive tools 
with the system that allow users and administrators to question the state of 
various components of the system to look for bottlenecks. The UNIX command 
top displays resources used on the system, as well as a sorted list of the "top" 
resource-using processes. Other tools display the state of disk I/0, memory 
allocation, and network traffic. The authors of these single-purpose tools try to 
guess what a user would want to see while analyzing a system and to provide 
that information. 
Making running operating systems easier to understand, debug, and tune 
is an active area of operating system research and implementation. The cycle 
of enabling tracing as system problems occur and analyzing the traces later 
is being broken by a new generation of kernel-enabled performance analysis 
tools. Further, these tools are not single-purpose or merely for sections of code 
that were written to emit debugging data. The Solaris 10 DTrace dynamic 
tracing facility is a leading example of such a tool. 
2.9.3 DTrace 
is a facility that dynamically adds probes to a running system, both 
i11 user processes and in the kernel. These probes can be queried via the D 
programming language to determine an astonishing amount about the kernel, 
the system state, and process activities. For example, Figure 2.22 follows an 
application as it executes a system call (ioctl) and further shows the functional 
calls within the kernel as they execute to perform the system call. Lines ending 
with "U" are executed in user mode, and lines ending in "K" in kernel mode. 
Debugging the interactions between user-level and kernel code is nearly 
impossible without a toolset that understands both sets of code and can 
instrument the interactions. For that toolset to be truly useful, it must be able 
to debug any area of a system, including areas that were not written with 
debugging in mind, and do so without affecting system reliability. This tool 
must also have a minimum performance impact-ideally it should have no 
impact when not in use and a proportional impact during use. The DTrace tool 
meets these requirements and provides a dynamic, safe, low-impact debugging 
environncent. 
Until the DTrace framework and tools became available with Solaris 10, 
kernel debugging was usually shrouded in mystery and accomplished via 
happenstance and archaic code and tools. For example, CPUs have a breakpoint 
feature that will halt execution and allow a debugger to examine the state of the 
system. Then execution can continue until the next breakpoint or termination. 
This method cannot be used in a multiuser operating-system kernel without 
negatively affecting all of the users on the system. Pn:rEEn,g, which periodically 
samples the instruction pointer to determine which code is being executed, can 
show statistical trends but not individual activities. Code can be included in 
the kernel to emit specific data under specific circumstances, but that code 

86 
Chapter 2 
# ./all.d 'pgrep xclock' XEventsQueued 
dtrace: script './all.d' matched 52377 probes 
CPU FUNCTION 
0 -> XEventsQueued 
0 
-> _XEventsQueued 
u 
u 
0 
-> _XllTransBytesReadable 
U 
0 
<- _XllTransBytesReadable 
U 
0 
-> _XllTransSocketBytesReadable U 
0 
<- _XllTransSocketBytesreadable U 
0 
-> ioctl 
U 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 <-
<-
<-
-
-> ioctl 
<-
-> getf 
-> set active fd 
<- set active fd 
<- getf 
-> get udatamodel 
<- get udatamodel 
-> releasef 
-> clear active 
-
<- clear active 
-> cv broadcast 
<- cv broadcast 
<- releasef 
ioctl 
ioctl 
XEventsQueued 
XEventsQueued 
fd 
fd 
K 
K 
K 
K 
K 
K 
K 
K 
K 
K 
K 
K 
K 
K 
u 
u 
u 
Figure 2.22 Solaris 10 dtrace follows a system call within the kernel. 
slows down the kernel and tends not to be included in the part of the kernel 
where the specific problem being debugged is occurring. 
In contrast, DTrace runs on production systems-systems that are running 
important or critical applications-and causes no harm to the system. It 
slows activities while enabled, but after execution it resets the system to its 
pre-debugging state. It is also a broad and deep tool. It can broadly debug 
everything happening in the system (both at the user and kernel levels and 
between the user and kernel layers). DTrace can also delve deeply into code, 
showing individual CPU instructions or kernel subroutine activities. 
is composed of a compiler, a framework, 
of 
written within that framework, and 
of those probes. DTrace 
providers create probes. Kernel structures exist to keep track of all probes that 
the providers have created. The probes are stored in a hash table data structure 
that is hashed by name and indexed according to unique probe identifiers. 
When a probe is enabled, a bit of code in the area to be probed is rewritten 
to call dtrace_probe (probe identifier) and then continue with the code's 
original operation. Different providers create different kinds of probes. For 
example, a kernel system-call probe works differently from a user-process 
probe, and that is different from an I/O probe. 
DTrace features a compiler that generates a byte code that is run in the 
kernel. This code is assured to be "safe" by the compiler. For example, no 

2.9 
87 
loops are allowed, and only specific kernel state modifications are allowed 
when specifically requested. Only users with the DTrace "privileges" (or "root" 
users) are allowed to use DT!·ace, as it can retrieve private kernel data (and 
modify data if requested). The generated code runs in the kernel and enables 
probes. It also enables consumers in user mode and enables communications 
between the two. 
A DT!·ace consumer is code that is interested in a probe and its results. 
A consumer requests that the provider create one or more probes. When a 
probe fires, it emits data that are managed by the kernel. Within the kernel, 
actions called 
or 
are performed when probes 
fire. One probe can cause multiple ECBs to execute if more than one consumer 
is interested in that probe. Each ECB contains a predicate ("if statement") that 
can filter out that ECB. Otherwise, the list of actions in the ECB is executed. The 
most usual action is to capture some bit of data, such as a variable's value at 
that point of the probe execution. By gathering such data, a complete picture of 
a user or kernel action can be built. Further, probes firing from both user space 
and the kernel can show how a user-level action caused kernel-level reactions. 
Such data are invaluable for performance monitoril1.g and code optimization. 
Once the probe consumer tennil1.ates, its ECBs are removed. If there are no 
ECBs consuming a probe, the probe is removed. That involves rewriting the 
code to remove the dtrace_probe call and put back the original code. Thus, 
before a probe is created and after it is destroyed, the system is exactly the 
same, as if no probing occurred. 
DTrace takes care to assure that probes do not use too much memory or 
CPU capacity, which could harm the running system. The buffers used to hold 
the probe results are monitored for exceeding default and maximum limits. 
CPU time for probe execution is monitored as well. If limits are exceeded, the 
consumer is terminated, along with the offending probes. Buffers are allocated 
per CPU to avoid contention and data loss. 
An example ofD code and its output shows some of its utility. The following 
program shows the DTrace code to enable scheduler probes and record the 
amount of CPU time of each process running with user ID 101 while those 
probes are enabled (that is, while the program nms): 
sched:: :on-cpu 
uid == 101 
{ 
self->ts 
timestamp; 
} 
sched: : :off -cpu 
self->ts 
{ 
} 
©time [execname] 
self->ts = 0; 
sum(timestamp- self->ts); 
The output of the program, showing the processes and how much time (in 
nanoseconds) they spend running on the CPUs, is shown in Figure 2.23. 

88 
Chapter 2 
2.10 
# dtrace -s sched.d 
dtrace: script 'sched.d' matched 6 probes 
Ac 
grwme-settings-d 
gnome-vfs-daemon 
dsdm 
wnck-applet 
gnome-panel 
clock-applet 
mapping-daemon 
xscreensaver 
meta city 
Xorg 
gnome-terminal 
mixer _applet2 
Java 
142354 
158243 
189804 
200030 
277864 
374916 
385475 
514177 
539281 
2579646 
5007269 
7388447 
10769137 
Figure 2.23 Output of the 0 code. 
Because DTrace is part of the open-source Solaris 10 operating system, 
it is being added to other operating systems when those systems do not 
have conflicting license agreements. For example, DTrace has been added to 
Mac OS X 10.5 and FreeBSD and will likely spread further due to its unique 
capabilities. Other operating systems, especially the Linux derivatives, are 
adding kernel-tracing functionality as well. Still other operating systems are 
beginning to include performance and tracing tools fostered by research at 
various institutions, including the Paradyn project. 
It is possible to design, code, and implement an operating system specifically 
for one machine at one site. More commonly, however, operating systems 
are designed to nm on any of a class of machines at a variety of sites with 
a variety of peripheral configurations. The system must then be configured 
or generated for each specific computer site, a process sometimes known as 
system generation (SYSGEN). 
The operating system is normally distributed on disk, on CD-ROM or 
DVD-ROM, or as an "ISO" image, which is a file in the format of a CD-ROM 
or DVD-ROM. To generate a system, we use a special program. This SYSGEN 
program reads from a given file, or asks the operator of the system for 
information concerning the specific configuration of the hardware systenc, or 
probes the hardware directly to determine what components are there. The 
following kinds of information must be determined. 
What CPU is to be used? What options (extended instruction sets, floating-
point arithmetic, and so on) are installed? For multiple CPU systems, each 
CPU may be described. 

2.11 
2.11 
89 
How will the boot disk be formatted? How many sections, or "partitions," 
will it be separated into, and what will go into each partition? 
How much memory is available? Some systems will determine this value 
themselves by referencing memory location after memory location until an 
"illegal address" fault is generated. This procedure defines the final legal 
address and hence the amount of available memory. 
What devices are available? The system will need to know how to address 
each device (the device number), the device interrupt number, the device's 
type and model, and any special device characteristics. 
What operating-system options are desired, or what parameter values are 
to be used? These options or values might include how many buffers of 
which sizes should be used, what type of CPU-scheduling algorithm is 
desired, what the maximum number of processes to be supported is, and 
so on. 
Once this information is determined, it can be used in several ways. At one 
extreme, a system administrator can use it to modify a copy of the source code of 
the operating system. The operating system then is completely compiled. Data 
declarations, initializations, and constants, along with conditional compilation, 
produce an output-object version of the operating system that is tailored to the 
system described. 
At a slightly less tailored level, the system description can lead to the 
creation of tables and the selection of modules from a precompiled library. 
These modules are linked together to form the generated operating system. 
Selection allows the library to contain the device drivers for all supported I/0 
devices, but only those needed are linked into the operating system. Because 
the system is not recompiled, system generation is faster, but the resulting 
system may be overly general. 
At the other extreme, it is possible to construct a system that is completely 
table driven. All the code is always part of the system, and selection occurs at 
execution time, rather than at compile or lil1.k time. System generation involves 
simply creating the appropriate tables to describe the system. 
The major differences among these approaches are the size and generality 
of the generated system and the ease of modifying it as the hardware 
configuration changes. Consider the cost of modifying the system to support a 
newly acquired graphics termil1.al or another disk drive. Balanced against that 
cost, of course, is the frequency (or infrequency) of such changes. 
After an operating system is generated, it must be made available for use by 
the hardware. But how does the hardware know where the kernel is or how to 
load that kernel? The procedure of starting a computer by loading the kernel 
is known as booting the system. On most computer systems, a small piece of 
code known as the bootstrap program or bootstrap loader locates the kernel, 
loads it into main memory, and starts its execution. Some computer systems, 
such as PCs, use a two-step process in which a simple bootstrap loader fetches 
a more complex boot program from disk, which in turn loads the kernel. 

90 
Chapter 2 
2.12 
When a CPU receives a reset event-for instance, when it is powered up 
or rebooted -the instruction register is loaded with a predefined memory 
location, and execution starts there. At that location is the initial bootstrap 
program. This program is in the form of read-only memory (ROM), because 
the RAM is in an unknown state at system startup. ROM is convenient because 
it needs no initialization and cannot easily be infected by a computer virus. 
The bootstrap program can perform a variety of tasks. Usually, one task 
is to run diagnostics to determine the state of the machine. If the diagnostics 
pass, the program can continue with the booting steps. It can also initialize all 
aspects of the system, from CPU registers to device controllers and the contents 
of main memory. Sooner or later, it starts the operating system. 
Some systems-such as cellular phones, PDAs, and game consoles-store 
the entire operating system in ROM. Storing the operating system in ROM is 
suitable for small operating systems, simple supporting hardware, and rugged 
operation. A problem with this approach is that changing the bootstrap code 
requires changing the ROM hardware chips. Some systems resolve this problem 
by using erasable programmable read-only memory (EPROM), which is read-
only except when explicitly given a command to become writable. All forms 
of ROM are also known as firmware, since their characteristics fall somewhere 
between those of hardware and those of software. A problem with firmware 
in general is that executing code there is slower thart executing code in RAM. 
Some systems store the operating system in firmware and copy it to RAM for 
fast execution. A final issue with firmware is that it is relatively expensive, so 
usually only small ammmts are available. 
For large operating systems (including most general-purpose operating 
systems like Windows, Mac OS X, and UNIX) or for systems that change 
frequently, the bootstrap loader is stored in firmware, and the operating system 
is on disk. In this case, the bootstrap nms diagnostics and has a bit of code 
that can read a single block at a fixed location (say block zero) from disk into 
memory and execute the code from that 
b!ock. The program stored in the 
boot block may be sophisticated enough to load the entire operating system 
into memory and begin its execution. More typically, it is simple code (as it fits 
in a single disk block) and knows only the address on disk and length of the 
remainder of the bootstrap program. 
is an example of an open-source 
bootstrap program for Linux systems. All of the disk-bound bootstrap, and the 
operating system itself, can be easily changed by writing new versions to disk. 
A disk that has a boot partition (more on that in Section 12.5.1) is called a boot 
disk or system disk. 
Now that the full bootsh·ap program has been loaded, it can traverse the 
file system to find the operating system kernel, load it into memory, and start 
its execution. It is only at this point that the system is said to be running. 
Operating systems provide a number of services. At the lowest level, system 
calls allow a running program to make requests from the operating system 
directly. At a higher level, the command interpreter or shell provides a 
mechanism for a user to issue a request without writing a program. Commands 
may come from files during batch-mode execution or directly from a terminal 
