Internet of Things [BCS701] 
MODULE 3 
 
 
Page 1 
 
 
 
MODULE 3 
IoT Platforms Design Methodology: Introduction, IoT Design Methodology, Case Study on IoT 
System for Weather Monitoring, loT Systems - Logical Design using Python: Introduction, Installing 
Python, Python Data Types and Data structures, Control flow, Functions, Modules, Packages, File 
Handling, Operations, Classes, Python Packages of Interest for IoT. 
 
IoT Platforms Design Methodology 
 
3.1 Introduction 
IoT systems are made up of many components and levels, which makes designing them complex. 
Designers often choose specific products or services, which can lead to vendor lock-in. This makes 
it difficult to update or change parts of the system later.To solve this problem, the chapter 
introduces a general design method that does not depend on any specific product, service, or 
programming language. This method helps reduce design time, maintenance, and improves system 
flexibility and compatibility. It is based on the IoT-A reference model but can be used for various 
industry needs. 
 
3.2 IoT Design Methodology 
Figure 5.1 shows the steps involved in the IoT system design methodology. Each of these steps 
is explained in the sections that follow. To explain these steps, we use the example of a smart 
IoT-based home automation system. 
 

Internet of Things [BCS701] 
MODULE 3 
 
 
Page 2 
 
 
 
3.2.1 Step 1: Purpose & Requirements Specification 
The first step in IoT system design methodology is to define the purpose and requirements of the 
system. In this step, the system purpose, behavior and requirements (such as data collection 
requirements, data analysis requirements, system management requirements, data privacy and 
security  requirements,  user  interface  requirements,  ...)  are  captured. 
Applying this to our example of a smart home automation system, the purpose and requirements 
for the system may be described as follows: 
 
Purpose: A home automation system that allows controlling of the lights in a home remotely using 
a web application. 
Behaviour: The home automation system should have auto and manual modes. In auto mode, the 
system measures the light level in the room and switches on the light when it gets dark. In manual 
mode, the system provides the option of manually and remotely switching on/off the light. 
System Management Requirement: The system should provide remote monitoring and control 
functions. 
Data Analysis Requirement: The system should perform local analysis of the data. 
Application Deployment Requirement: The application should be deployed locally on the 
device, but should be accessible remotely. 
Security Requirement: The system should have basic user authentication capability. 
 
3.2.2 Step 2: Process Specification 
The second step in the IoT design methodology is to define the process specification. In this step, 
the use cases of the IoT system are formally described based on and derived from the purpose and 
requirement specifications. Figure 5.2 shows the process diagram for the home automation 
system. The process diagram shows the two modes of the system – auto and manual. In a process 
diagram, the circle denotes the start of a process, diamond denotes a decision box and rectangle 
denotes a state or attribute. When the auto mode is chosen, the system monitors the light level. If 
the light level is low, the system changes the state of the light to “on”. Whereas, if the light level 
is high, the system changes the state of the light to “off”. When the manual mode is chosen, the 
system checks the light state set by the user. If the light state set by the user is “on”, the system 
changes the state of light to “on”. Whereas, if the light state set by the user is “off”, the system 
changes the state of light to “off”. 

Internet of Things [BCS701] 
MODULE 3 
 
 
Page 3 
 
 
 
 
 
3.2.3 Step 3: Domain Model Specification 
The third step in the IoT design methodology is to define the Domain Model. The domain model 
describes the main concepts, entities and objects in the domain of IoT system to be designed. 
Domain model defines the attributes of the objects and relationships between objects. Domain 
model provides an abstract representation of the concepts, objects and entities in the IoT domain, 
independent of any specific technology or platform. With the domain model, the IoT system 
designers can get an understanding of the IoT domain for which the system is to be designed. 
Figure 5.3 shows the domain model for the home automation system example. The entities, objects 
and concepts defined in the domain model include: 
• 
Physical Entity: 
Physical Entity is a discrete and identifiable entity in the physical environment (e.g., a room, 
a light, an appliance, a car, etc.). The IoT system provides information about the Physical 
Entity (using sensors) or performs actuation upon the Physical Entity (e.g., switching on a 
light). In the home automation example, there are two Physical Entities involved – one is the 
room in the home (of which the lighting conditions are to be monitored) and the other is the 
light appliance to be controlled. 
• 
Virtual Entity: 
Virtual Entity is a representation of the Physical Entity in the digital world. For each Physical 
Entity, there is a Virtual Entity in the domain model. In the home automation example, there 
is one Virtual Entity for the room to be monitored, another for the appliance to be controlled. 
• 
Device: 
Device provides a medium for interactions between Physical Entities and Virtual Entities. 
Devices are either attached to Physical Entities or placed near Physical Entities. Devices are 
used to gather information about Physical Entities (e.g., from sensors), perform actuation upon 
Physical Entities (e.g., using actuators) or used to process information (e.g., using tags). In the 
home automation example, the device is a single-board mini computer which has light sensor 
and actuator (relay switch) attached to it. 
• 
Resource: 
Resources are software components which can be either "on-device" or "network-resources". 
On-device resources are hosted on the device and include software components that either 
provide information or enable actuation upon the Physical Entity to which the device is 
attached. Network resources include software components that are available in network (such 
as a database). In the home automation example, the on-device resource is the operating system 

Internet of Things [BCS701] 
MODULE 3 
 
 
Page 4 
 
 
 
that runs on the single-board minicomputer. 
• 
Service: 
Services provide an interface for interacting with the Physical Entity. Services access the 
resources hosted on the device or the network resources to obtain information about the 
Physical Entity or perform actuation upon the Physical Entity. 
 
In the home automation example, there are three services: 
(1) a service that sets mode to auto or manual, or retrieves the current mode;(2) a service that 
sets the light appliance state to on/off, or retrieves the current light state; (3) a controller 
service that runs as a native service on the device. 
 
• 
When in auto mode, the controller service monitors the light level and switches the light 
on/off and updates the status in the status database. 
When in manual mode, the controller service retrieves the current state from the database and 
switches the light on/off. 
• 
The process of deriving the services from the process specification and information model is 
described in the later sections. 
 
Figure 5.3: Domain model of the home automation IoT system 
 
3.2.4 Step 4: Information Model Specification 
The fourth step in the IoT design methodology is to define the Information Model. Information 
Model defines the structure of all the information in the IoT system, for example, attributes of 
Virtual Entities, relations, etc. Information model does not describe the specifics of how the 
information is represented or stored. To define the information model, we first list the Virtual 
Entities defined in the Domain Model. Information model adds more details to the Virtual 

Internet of Things [BCS701] 
MODULE 3 
 
 
Page 5 
 
 
 
Entities by defining their attributes and relations. In the home automation example, there are 
two Virtual Entities – a Virtual Entity for the light appliance (with attribute – light state) and a 
Virtual Entity for the room (with attribute – light level). Figure 5.4 shows the Information 
Model for the home automation system example. 
 
 
 
 
3.2.5 Step 5: Service Specifications 
The fifth step in the IoT design methodology is to define the service specifications. Service 
specifications define the services in the IoT system, service types, service inputs/output, 
service endpoints, service schedules, service preconditions and service effects. 
You learned about the Process Specification and Information Model in the previous sections. 
Figure 5.5 shows an example of deriving the services from the process specification and 
information model for the home automation IoT system. From the process specification and 
information model, we identify the states and attributes. For each state and attribute, we 
define a service. These services either change the state or attribute values or retrieve the 
current values. For example, the Mode service sets mode to auto or manual or retrieves the 
current mode. The State service sets the light appliance state to on/off or retrieves the current 
light state. The Controller service monitors the light level in auto mode and switches the light 
on/off and updates the status in the status database. In manual mode, the controller service, 
retrieves the current state from the database and switches the light on/off. 
 
Figures 5.6, 5.7 and 5.8 show specifications of the controller, mode and state services of the 
home automation system. The Mode service is a RESTful web service that sets mode to auto 
or manual (PUT request), or retrieves the current mode (GET request). The mode is updated 
to/retrieved from the database. The State service is a RESTful web service that sets the light 
appliance state to on/off (PUT request), or retrieves the current light state (GET request). The 
state is updated to/retrieved from the status database. The Controller service runs as a native 
service on the device. When in auto mode, the controller service monitors the light level and 
switches the light on/off and updates the status in the status database. When in manual mode, 
the controller service retrieves the current state from the database and switches the light 
on/off. 

Internet of Things [BCS701] 
MODULE 3 
 
 
Page 6 
 
 
 
 

Internet of Things [BCS701] 
MODULE 3 
 
 
Page 7 
 
 
 
3.2.6 Step 6: IoT Level Specification 
The sixth step in the IoT design methodology is to define the IoT level for the system. In 
Chapter-1, we defined five IoT deployment levels. Figure 5.9 shows the deployment level of the 
home automation IoT system, which is level-1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.2.7 Step 7: Functional View Specification 
The seventh step in the IoT design methodology is to define the Functional View. The Functional 
View (FV) defines the functions of the IoT systems grouped into various Functional Groups 
(FGs). Each Functional Group either provides functionalities for interacting with instances of 

Internet of Things [BCS701] 
MODULE 3 
 
 
Page 8 
 
 
 
concepts defined in the Domain Model or provides information related to these concepts. 
The Functional Groups (FG) included in a Functional View include: 
• 
Device: The device FG contains devices for monitoring and control. In the home automation 
example, the device FG includes a single board mini-computer, a light. 
 
Communication: The communication FG handles the communication for the IoT system. The 
communication FG includes the communication protocols that form the backbone of IoT 
systems and enable network connectivity. You learned about various link, network, transport 
and application layer protocols in Chapter-1. The communication FG also includes the 
communication APIs (such as REST and WebSocket) that are used by the services and 
applications to exchange data over the network. In the home automation example the 
communication protocols include – 802.11 (link layer), IPv4/IPv6 (network layer), TCP 
(transport layer), and HTTP (application layer). The communication API used in the home 
automation examples is a REST-based API. 
Services: The service FG includes various services involved in the IoT system such as services 
for device monitoring, device control services, data publishing services and services for device 
discovery.in home automation example, there are two REST service (mode and state service) 
and one native service (controller service). 
Management: The management FG includes all functionalities that are needed to configure 
and manage the IoT system. 
Security: The security FG includes security mechanisms for the IoT system such as 
authentication, authorization, data security, etc. 
Application: The application FG includes applications that provide an interface to the users 
to control and monitor various aspects of the IoT system. Applications also allow users to 
view the system status and the processed data. 
 
Figure 5.10 shows an example of mapping deployment level to functional groups for home 
automation IoT system device maps to the Device FG (sensors, actuators devices, computing 

Internet of Things [BCS701] 
MODULE 3 
 
 
Page 9 
 
 
 
devices) and the Management FG (device management). Resources map to the Device FG (on- 
device resource) and Communication FG (communication APIs and protocols). Controller service 

Internet of Things [BCS701] 
MODULE 3 
 
 
Page 10 
 
 
 
maps to the Services FG (native service). Web Services map to Services FG. Database maps to the 
Management FG (database management) and Security FG (database security). Application maps 
to the Application FG (web application, application and database servers), Management FG (app 
management) and Security FG (app security). 
 
 
3.2.8 Step 8: Operational View Specification 
The eighth step in the IoT design methodology is to define the Operational View 
Specifications. 
In this step, various options pertaining to the IoT system deployment and operation are 
defined, such as service hosting options, storage options, device options, application hosting 
options, etc. 
Figure 5.11 shows an example of mapping functional groups to operational view 
specifications for home automation IoT system. 

Internet of Things [BCS701] 
MODULE 3 
 
 
Page 11 
 
 
 
 
Operational View specifications for the home automation example are as follows: 
Devices: Computing device (Raspberry Pi), light dependent resistor (sensor), relay switch 
(actuator). 
Communication APIs: REST APIs 
Communication Protocols: 
o Link Layer – 802.11 
o Network Layer – IPv4/IPv6 
o Transport – TCP 
o Application – HTTP 
Services: 
1. Controller Service – Hosted on device, implemented in Python and run as a native 
service. 
2. Mode service – REST-ful web service, hosted on device, implemented in Python. 
3. State service – REST-ful web service, hosted on device, implemented with Django- 
REST Framework. 
Application: 
• 
Web Application – Django Web Application, 
• 
Application Server – Django App Server, 
• 
Database Server – MySQL 
Security: 
• 
Authentication: Web App, Database 
• 
Authorization: Web App, Database 
Management: 
• 
Application Management – Django App Management 
• 
Database Management – MySQL DB Management 
• 
Device Management – Raspberry Pi device Management 
 
 
3.2.9 Step 9: Device & Component Integration 
The ninth step in the IoT design methodology is the integration of the devices and 
components. Figure 5.12 shows a schematic diagram of the home automation IoT 
system. The devices and components used in this example are Raspberry Pi 
minicomputer, LDR sensor and relay switch actuator. A detailed description of 
Raspberry Pi board and how to interface sensors and actuators with the board is provided 
in later chapters. 

Internet of Things [BCS701] 
MODULE 3 
 
 
Page 12 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.2.10 Step 10: Application Development 
The final step in the IoT design methodology is to develop the IoT application. Figure 
5.13 shows a screenshot of the home automation web application. The application has 
controls for the mode (auto on or auto off) and the light (on or off). In the auto mode, the 
IoT system controls the light appliance automatically based on the lighting conditions in 
the room. When auto mode is enabled the light control in the application is disabled and 
it reflects the current state of the light. When the auto mode is disabled, the light control 
is enabled and it is used for manually controlling the light. 
 

Internet of Things [BCS701] 
MODULE 3 
 
 
Page 13 
 
 
 
3.3 Case Study on IoT System for Weather Monitoring 
In this section we present a case study on design of an IoT system for weather 
monitoring using the IoT design methodology. The purpose of the weather monitoring system 
is to collect data on environmental conditions such as temperature, pressure, humidity and 
light.in an area using multiple end nodes. The end nodes send the data to the cloud where the 
data is aggregated and analysed. 
Figure 5.14 shows the process specification for the weather monitoring system. The 
process specification shows that the sensors are read after fixed intervals and the sensor 
measurements are stored. 
 
 
Figure 5.15 shows the domain model for the weather monitoring system. In this 
domain model the physical entity is the environment which is being monitored. There 
is a virtual entity for the environment. Devices include temperature sensor, pressure 
sensor, humidity sensor, light sensor and single-board minicomputer. Resources are 
software components which can be either on-device or network-resources. Services 
include the controller service that monitors the temperature, pressure, humidity and 
light and sends the readings to the cloud. 
Figure 5.16 shows the information model for the weather monitoring system. In this 
example, there is one virtual entity for the environment being sensed. The virtual entity 
has attributes – temperature, pressure, humidity and light. 
Figure 5.17 shows an example of deriving the services from the process specification 
and information model for the weather monitoring system. 

Internet of Things [BCS701] 
MODULE 3 
 
 
Page 14 
 
 
 
 

Internet of Things [BCS701] 
MODULE 3 
 
 
Page 15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.18 shows the specification of the controller service for the weather monitoring 
system. The controller service runs as a native service on the device and monitors 
temperature, pressure, humidity and light once every 15 seconds. The controller service 
calls the REST service to store these measurements in the cloud. In Chapter-8 we 
describe a Platform-as-a-Service called Xively that can be used for creating solutions 
for Internet of Things. 

Internet of Things [BCS701] 
MODULE 3 
 
 
Page 16 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.19 shows the deployment design for the system. The system consists of 
multiple nodes placed in different locations for monitoring temperature, humidity and 
pressure in an area. The end nodes are equipped with various sensors (such as 
temperature, pressure, humidity and light). The end nodes send the data to the cloud 
and the data is stored in a cloud database. The analysis of data is done in the cloud to 
aggregate the data and make predictions. A cloud-based application is used for 
visualizing the data. The centralized controller can send control commands to the end 
nodes, for example, to configure the monitoring interval on the end nodes. 
 
Figure 5.20 shows an example of mapping deployment level to functional groups for 

Internet of Things [BCS701] 
MODULE 3 
 
 
Page 17 
 
 
 
the weather monitoring system. 
 
 
Figure 5.21 shows an example of mapping functional groups to operational view 
specifications for the weather monitoring system. 
 

Internet of Things [BCS701] 
MODULE 3 
 
 
Page 18 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.22 shows a schematic diagram of the weather monitoring system. The devices and 
components used in this example are Raspberry Pi minicomputer, temperature sensor, 
humidity sensor, pressure sensor and LDR sensor. 

Internet of Things [BCS701] 
MODULE 3 
 
 
Page 19 
 
 
 
loT Systems - Logical Design using Python 
3.4 : Introduction 
Python is a general-purpose high-level programming language. Python 2.0 was released in 
the year 2000 and Python 3.0 was released in the year 2008. The 3.0 version is not backward 
compatible with earlier releases. The most recent release of Python is version 3.3. Currently, 
there is limited library support for the 3.x versions with operating systems such as Linux and 
Mac still using Python 2.x as default language. The exercises and examples in this book have 
been developed with Python version 2.7. 
 
The main characteristics of Python are: 
 
Multi-paradigm programming language 
Python supports more than one programming paradigm including object-oriented 
programming and structured programming. 
 
Interpreted Language 
Python is an interpreted language and does not require an explicit compilation step. The 
Python interpreter executes the program source code directly, statement by statement, as a 
processor or scripting engine does. 
 
Interactive Language 
Python provides an interactive mode in which the user can submit commands at the Python 
prompt and interact with the interpreter directly. 
 
The key benefits of Python are: 
 
Easy-to-learn, read and maintain 
Python is a minimalistic language with relatively few keywords, uses English keywords and 
has fewer syntactical constructions as compared to other languages. Reading Python 
programs is easy with pseudo-code like constructs. Python is easy to learn yet an extremely 
powerful language for a wide range of applications. Due to its simplicity, programs written 
in Python are generally easy to maintain. 
 
Object and Procedure Oriented 
Python supports both procedure-oriented programming and object-oriented programming. 
Procedure oriented paradigm allows programs to be written around procedures or functions 
that allow reuse of code. Procedure oriented paradigm allows programs to be written around 
objects that include both data and functionality. 
 
Extendable 
Python is an extendable language and allows integration of low-level modules written in 
languages such as C/C++. This is useful when you want to speed up a critical portion of a 
program. 

Internet of Things [BCS701] 
MODULE 3 
 
 
Page 20 
 
 
 
 
Scalable 
Due to the minimalistic nature of Python, it provides a manageable structure for large 
programs. 
Portable 
Since Python is an interpreted language, programmers do not have to worry about 
compilation, linking and loading of programs. Python programs can be directly executed from 
source code and copied from one machine to another without worrying about portability. The 
Python interpreter converts the source code to an intermediate form called byte codes and 
then translates this into the native language of your specific system and then runs it. 
 
Broad Library Support 
Python has a broad library support and works on various platforms such as Windows, Linux, 
Mac, etc. There are a large number of Python packages available for various applications 
such as machine learning, image processing, network programming, cryptography, etc. 
 
3.5 Installing Python 
Python is a highly portable language that works on various platforms such as Windows, 
Linux, Mac, etc. This section describes the Python installation steps for Windows and Linux: 
 
Windows 
Python binaries for Windows can be downloaded from http://www.python.org/getit. 
For the examples and exercises in this book, you would require Python 2.7 which can be 
directly downloaded from: 
http://www.python.org/ftp/python/2.7.5/python-2.7.5.msi 
 
Once the Python binary is installed you can run the Python shell at the command prompt using: 
 
> python 
Linux 
Box 6.1 provides the commands for installing Python on Ubuntu. 
 

Internet of Things [BCS701] 
MODULE 3 
 
 
Page 21 
 
 
 
3.6 Python Data Types & Data Structures 
3.6.1 Numbers 
Number data type is used to store numeric values. Numbers are immutable data types, 
therefore changing the value of a number data type results in a newly allocated object. Box 
6.2 shows some examples of working with numbers. 

Internet of Things [BCS701] 
MODULE 3 
 
 
Page 22 
 
 
 
 
 
3.5.2 Strings 
A string is simply a list of characters in order. There are no limits to the number of characters 
you can have in a string. A string which has zero characters is called an empty string. Box 
6.3 shows some examples of working with strings. 
 

Internet of Things [BCS701] 
MODULE 3 
 
 
Page 23 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.5.3 Lists 
A list is a compound data type used to group together other values. 
• 
List items need not all be of the same type. 
• 
A list contains items separated by commas and enclosed within square brackets []. 

Internet of Things [BCS701] 
MODULE 3 
 
 
Page 24 
 
 
 
 

Internet of Things [BCS701] 
MODULE 3 
 
 
Page 25 
 
 
 
 

Internet of Things [BCS701] 
MODULE 3 
 
 
Page 26 
 
 
 
3.5.4 Tuples 
A tuple is a sequence data type that is similar to the list. A tuple consists of a number of values 
separated by commas and enclosed within parentheses. Unlike lists, the elements of tuples 
cannot be changed, so tuples can be thought of as read-only lists. Box 6.5 shows examples of 
working with tuples. 

Internet of Things [BCS701] 
MODULE 3 
 
 
Page 27 
 
 
 
3.5.5 Dictionaries 
A dictionary is a mapping data type or a kind of hash table that maps keys to values. Keys 
in a dictionary can be of any data type, though numbers and strings are commonly used for 
keys. Values in a dictionary can be any data type or object. 
Box 6.6 shows examples on working with dictionaries. 

Internet of Things [BCS701] 
MODULE 3 
 
 
Page 28 
 
 
 
Nested Dictionaries 
 
Checking for Key Existence 
 
3.5.6 Type Conversions 
Box 6.7 shows examples of type conversions. 
 

Internet of Things [BCS701] 
MODULE 3 
 
 
Page 29 
 
 
 
 
 
3.6 Control Flow 
3.6.1 if Statement 
 
The if statement in Python is similar to the if statement in other languages. 
Box 6.8 shows examples. 
 

Internet of Things [BCS701] 
MODULE 3 
 
 
Page 30 
 
 
 
 
 
3.6.2 for 
The for statement in Python iterates over items of any sequence (list, string, etc.) in the order 
in which they appear in the sequence. This behaviour differs from the for statement in 
languages such as C, where initialization, incrementing, and stopping criteria are provided. 
Box 6.9: for statement examples 
 
Looping over characters in a string: 
 
Looping over items in a list: 
 

Internet of Things [BCS701] 
MODULE 3 
 
 
Page 31 
 
 
 
3.6.3 while 
The while statement in Python executes the statements within the while loop as long as the 
condition is true. 
Box 6.10 shows a while statement example. 
 
3.6.4 range 
The  range  statement  in  Python  generates  a  list  of  numbers  in  arithmetic  progression. 
Examples are shown in Box 6.11. 
 
3.6.5 break/continue 
The break and continue statements in Python are similar to statements in C. 
• 
break exits the for/while loop. 
• 
continue skips the rest of the code inside the loop for the current iteration and jumps to 
the next iteration. 
Box 6.12 shows examples. 

Internet of Things [BCS701] 
MODULE 3 
 
 
Page 32 
 
 
 
 
 
Continue statement example 
 
Output 
 
3.6.6 pass 
 
The pass statement in Python is a null operation. 
It is used when a statement is syntactically required but no command/code should run. 
Box 6.13 shows an example. 

Internet of Things [BCS701] 
MODULE 3 
 
 
Page 33 
 
 
 
 
 
Output 
 
 
3.7 Functions 
A function is a block of code that: 
• 
Takes information in (parameters), 
• 
Performs some computation, 
• 
Returns new information. 
 
A function in Python begins with the def keyword, followed by: 
• 
Function name, 
• 
Parameters (inside parentheses), 
• 
A colon: to start the code block, 
• 
An optional string or docstring. 
Box 6.14: Example of a function in Python 
 

Internet of Things [BCS701] 
MODULE 3 
 
 
Page 34 
 
 
 
Default Arguments 
Functions in Python can have default parameter values. If such a function is called with 
missing parameters, the default values are used. 
Box 6.15: Example of function with default arguments 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Passing by Reference in Functions 
 
In Python, all parameters are passed by reference. This means: 
• 
If you modify a mutable object (like a list) inside a function, 
• 
The change is reflected in the caller's scope. 
 
Box 6.16: Example of Passing by Reference 
 
Note: The function displayFruits modifies the original fruits list by adding 'mango', and this change 
persists after the function call—demonstrating Python’s pass-by-reference behavior for 
mutable data types like lists. 

Internet of Things [BCS701] 
MODULE 3 
 
 
Page 35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Functions can also be called using keyword arguments that identify the arguments by the 
parameter name when the function is called. 
 
Box 6.17 shows examples of keyword arguments. 
 

Internet of Things [BCS701] 
MODULE 3 
 
 
Page 36 
 
 
 
 

Internet of Things [BCS701] 
MODULE 3 
 
 
Page 37 
 
 
 
Python functions can have variable length arguments. These variable length arguments 
are passed as a tuple to the function with an argument prefixed with asterix (*) as shown in 
Box 6.18: Example of variable length arguments 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.8 Modules 
 
Python allows organizing of the program code into different modules which improves the 
code readability and management. A module is a Python file that defines some functionality 
in the form of functions or classes. Modules can be imported using the import keyword. 
Modules to be imported must be present in the search path. Box 6.19 shows the example of a 
student module that contains two functions and Box 6.20 shows an example of importing the 
student module and using it. 
 
Box 6.19: Module student 

Internet of Things [BCS701] 
MODULE 3 
 
 
Page 38 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Box 6.20: Using module student python CopyEdit 

Internet of Things [BCS701] 
MODULE 3 
 
 
Page 39 
 
 
 
 

Internet of Things [BCS701] 
MODULE 3 
 
 
Page 40 
 
 
 
The import keyword followed by the module name imports all the functions in the 
module. If you want to use only a specific function it is recommended to import only that 
function using the keyword from as shown in the example in Box 6.21. 
Box 6.21: Importing a specific function from a module 
 
Python comes with a number of standard modules such as system related modules 
(sys), OS related module (os), mathematical modules (math, fractions, etc.), Internet related 
modules (email, json. etc), etc. The complete list of standard modules is available in the 
Python documentation [87]. Box 6.22 shows an example of listing all names defined in a 
module using the built-in dir function. 
 
Box 6.22: Listing all names defined in a module 
 

Internet of Things [BCS701] 
MODULE 3 
 
 
Page 41 
 
 
 
3.9 Packages 
Python package is hierarchical file structure that consists of modules and subpackages. 
Packages allow better organization of modules related to a single application environment. 
For example, Box 6.23 shows the listing of the skimage package that provides image 
processing algorithms. The package is organized into a root directory (skimage) with sub- 
directories (color, draw, etc) which are sub-packages within the skimage package. Each 
directory contains a special file named  init .py which tells Python to treat directories as 
packages. This file can either be an empty file or contain some initialization code for the 
package. 
 
Box 6.23: skimage package listing 
 

Internet of Things [BCS701] 
MODULE 3 
 
 
Page 42 
 
 
 
3.10 File Handling 
Python allows reading and writing to files using the file object. The open(filename, mode) 
function is used to get a file object. The mode can be read (r), write (w), append (a), read and 
write (r+ or w+), read-binary (rb), write-binary (wb), etc. Box 6.24 shows an example of 
reading an entire file with read function. After the file contents have been read the close 
function is called which closes the file object. 
 
Box 6.24: Example of reading an entire file 
 
 
Box 6.25: Example of reading line by line 
 
 
Box 6.26: Example of reading lines in a loop 

Internet of Things [BCS701] 
MODULE 3 
 
 
Page 43 
 
 
 
 
 
Box 6.27: Example of reading a certain number of bytes 
 
 
Box 6.28: Example of getting the current position of read 
 
 
Box 6.29: Example of seeking to a certain position python CopyEdit 
 

Internet of Things [BCS701] 
MODULE 3 
 
 
Page 44 
 
 
 
Box 6.30: Example of writing to a file 
 
3.11 Date/Time Operations 
 
Python provides several functions for date and time access and conversions. The datetime 
module allows manipulating date and time in several ways. Box 6.31 shows examples of 
manipulating with date. 
 
Box 6.31: Examples of manipulating with date 
 
The time module in Python provides various time-related functions. Box 6.32 shows 
examples of manipulating with time. 
 
Box 6.32: Examples of manipulating with time 

Internet of Things [BCS701] 
MODULE 3 
 
 
Page 45 
 
 
 
 
 
3.12 Classes 
Python is an Object-Oriented Programming (OOP) language. Python provides all the 
standard features of Object-Oriented Programming such as: 
 
1. Classes 
2. Class variables 
3. Class methods 
4. Inheritance 
5. Function overloading 
6. Operator overloading 
 
Let us briefly look at these OOP concepts: 
Class 
A class is simply a representation of a type of object and user-defined prototype for 
an object composed of three things: 
➢ A name 
➢ Attributes 
➢ Operations/methods 
Instance/Object 
An object is an instance of the data structure defined by a class. 

Internet of Things [BCS701] 
MODULE 3 
 
 
Page 46 
 
 
 
Inheritance 
Inheritance is the process of forming a new class from an existing class or base class. 
Function Overloading 
Function overloading is a form of polymorphism that allows a function to have different 
meanings, depending on its context. 
Operator Overloading 
Operator overloading is a form of polymorphism that allows assignment of more than one 
function to a particular operator. 
Function Overriding 
Function overriding allows a child class to provide a specific implementation of a function 
already provided by the base class.The child class implementation of the overridden function 
has the same name, parameters, and return type as the function in the base class. 
example (Box 6.33) which shows: studentCount as a class variable shared across all instances 
name, id, and grades as instance variables unique to each object The use of  init () as the 
constructor method in Python. 
The class constructor initialize a new instance when it is created. The function_del_() is the 
class destructor. 
 
Example 

Internet of Things [BCS701] 
MODULE 3 
 
 
Page 47 
 
 
 
 
 
Box 6.34: Examples of class inheritance, in the example 
Shape is the base class. 
Circle is the derived (child) class, inheriting from Shape. 
super().  init  () is used to call the base class constructor. 
_label is a hidden attribute due to the double underscore (  ), which triggers name 
mangling. 
• 
Internally,   label in Circle becomes _Circle  label. 

Internet of Things [BCS701] 
MODULE 3 
 
 
Page 48 
 
 
 
 

Internet of Things [BCS701] 
MODULE 3 
 
 
Page 49 
 
 
 
 

Internet of Things [BCS701] 
MODULE 3 
 
 
Page 50 
 
 
 
3.13 Python Packages of Interest for IoT 
3.13.1 JSON 
JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) is an easy to read and write data-interchange 
format. JSON is used as an alternative to XML and is easy for machines to parse and 
generate. JSON is built on two structures – a collection of name-value pairs (e.g. a 
Python dictionary) and ordered lists of values (e.g., a Python list). 
JSON format is often used for serializing and transmitting structured 
data over a network connection, for example, transmitting data between a server and 
web application. Box 6.35 shows an example of a Twitter tweet object encoded as 
JSON. 
 

Internet of Things [BCS701] 
MODULE 3 
 
 
Page 51 
 
 
 
 
 
Exchange of information encoded as JSON involves encoding and decoding steps. The 
Python JSON package provides functions for encoding and decoding JSON. Box 6.36 shows 
an example of JSON encoding and decoding. 

Internet of Things [BCS701] 
MODULE 3 
 
 
Page 52 
 
 
 
 

Internet of Things [BCS701] 
MODULE 3 
 
 
Page 53 
 
 
 
3.13.2 XML 
XML (Extensible Markup Language) is a data format for structured document interchange. 
Box 6.37 shows an example of an XML file. In this section you will learn how to parse, read 
and write XML with Python. The Python minidom library provides a minimal implementation 
of the Document Object Model interface and has an API similar to that in other languages. 
Box 6.38 shows a Python program for parsing an XML file. Box 6.39 shows a Python 
program for creating an XML file. 

Internet of Things [BCS701] 
MODULE 3 
 
 
Page 54 
 
 
 
Box 6.38: Parsing an XML file in Python 
 
 
 
 
Box 6.39: Creating an XML File with Python 

Internet of Things [BCS701] 
MODULE 3 
 
 
Page 55 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.13.3 HTTPLib & URLLib 
HTTPLib2 and URLLib2 are Python libraries used in network/internet programming. 
HTTPLib2 is an HTTP client library and URLLib2 is a library for fetching URLs. 
Box 6.40 shows an example of an HTTP GET request using the HTTPLib. The variable 

Internet of Things [BCS701] 
MODULE 3 
 
 
Page 56 
 
 
 
resp contains the response headers and content contains the content retrieved from the URL. 
 
Box 6.41 shows an HTTP request example using URLLib2. A request object is created by 
calling urllib2.Request with the URL to fetch as input parameter. Then urllib2.urlopen is 
called with the request object which returns the response object for the requested URL. The 
response object is read by calling read function. 
 
Box 6.42 shows an example of an HTTP POST request. The data in the POST body is 
encoded using the urlencode function from urllib. 

Internet of Things [BCS701] 
MODULE 3 
 
 
Page 57 
 
 
 
 
 
Box 6.43 shows an example of sending data to a URL using URLLib2 (e.g., an HTML 
form submission). This example is similar to the HTTP POST example in Box 6.42 and uses 
the URLLib2 request object instead of HTTPLib2. 
 

Internet of Things [BCS701] 
MODULE 3 
 
 
Page 58 
 
 
 
3.13.4 SMTPLib 
Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP) is a protocol which handles sending email and routing 
e-mail between mail servers. The Python smtplib module provides an SMTP client session 
object that can be used to send email. 
Box 6.44 shows a Python example of sending email from a Gmail account. The string 
message contains the email message to be sent. To send email from a Gmail account the 
Gmail SMTP server is specified in the server string. 
To send an email, first a connection is established with the SMTP server by calling smtplib. 
SMTP with the SMTP server name and port. The user name and password provided are then 
used to login into the server. The email is then sent by calling server. send mail function with 
the from address, to address list and message as input parameters. 
 

Internet of Things [BCS701] 
MODULE 3 
 
 
Page 59 
 
 
 
Module 3 Question Bank 
 
1. What is the difference between a physical and virtual entity? 
2. What is an IoT device? 
3. What is the purpose of information model? 
4. What are the various service types? 
5. What is the need for a controller service? 
6. What is the difference between procedure-oriented programming and object-oriented 
programming? 
7. What is an interpreted language? 
8. Describe a use case of Python dictionary? 
9. What is a keyword argument in Python? 
10. What are variable length arguments? 
11. What is the difference between a Python module and a package? 
12. How is function overriding implemented in Python? 
