Section 9.4.
Backward Chaining
337
The fact Magic(West) is also added to the KB. In this way, even if the knowledge base
contains facts about millions of Americans, only Colonel West will be considered during the
forward inference process. The complete process for deﬁning magic sets and rewriting the
knowledge base is too complex to go into here, but the basic idea is to perform a sort of
“generic” backward inference from the goal in order to work out which variable bindings
need to be constrained. The magic sets approach can therefore be thought of as a kind of
hybrid between forward inference and backward preprocessing.
9.4
BACKWARD CHAINING
The second major family of logical inference algorithms uses the backward chaining ap-
proach introduced in Section 7.5 for deﬁnite clauses. These algorithms work backward from
the goal, chaining through rules to ﬁnd known facts that support the proof. We describe
the basic algorithm, and then we describe how it is used in logic programming, which is the
most widely used form of automated reasoning. We also see that backward chaining has some
disadvantages compared with forward chaining, and we look at ways to overcome them. Fi-
nally, we look at the close connection between logic programming and constraint satisfaction
problems.
9.4.1
A backward-chaining algorithm
Figure 9.6 shows a backward-chaining algorithm for deﬁnite clauses. FOL-BC-ASK(KB,
goal) will be proved if the knowledge base contains a clause of the form lhs ⇒goal, where
lhs (left-hand side) is a list of conjuncts. An atomic fact like American(West) is considered
as a clause whose lhs is the empty list. Now a query that contains variables might be proved
in multiple ways. For example, the query Person(x) could be proved with the substitution
{x/John} as well as with {x/Richard}. So we implement FOL-BC-ASK as a generator—
GENERATOR
a function that returns multiple times, each time giving one possible result.
Backward chaining is a kind of AND/OR search—the OR part because the goal query
can be proved by any rule in the knowledge base, and the AND part because all the conjuncts
in the lhs of a clause must be proved. FOL-BC-OR works by fetching all clauses that might
unify with the goal, standardizing the variables in the clause to be brand-new variables, and
then, if the rhs of the clause does indeed unify with the goal, proving every conjunct in the
lhs, using FOL-BC-AND. That function in turn works by proving each of the conjuncts in
turn, keeping track of the accumulated substitution as we go. Figure 9.7 is the proof tree for
deriving Criminal(West) from sentences (9.3) through (9.10).
Backward chaining, as we have written it, is clearly a depth-ﬁrst search algorithm.
This means that its space requirements are linear in the size of the proof (neglecting, for
now, the space required to accumulate the solutions). It also means that backward chaining
(unlike forward chaining) suffers from problems with repeated states and incompleteness. We
will discuss these problems and some potential solutions, but ﬁrst we show how backward
chaining is used in logic programming systems.
MODULE 5

338
Chapter
9.
Inference in First-Order Logic
function FOL-BC-ASK(KB,query) returns a generator of substitutions
return FOL-BC-OR(KB,query,{ })
generator FOL-BC-OR(KB,goal,θ) yields a substitution
for each rule (lhs ⇒rhs) in FETCH-RULES-FOR-GOAL(KB, goal) do
(lhs, rhs) ←STANDARDIZE-VARIABLES((lhs, rhs))
for each θ′ in FOL-BC-AND(KB,lhs, UNIFY(rhs, goal, θ)) do
yield θ′
generator FOL-BC-AND(KB,goals,θ) yields a substitution
if θ = failure then return
else if LENGTH(goals) = 0 then yield θ
else do
ﬁrst,rest ←FIRST(goals), REST(goals)
for each θ′ in FOL-BC-OR(KB, SUBST(θ, ﬁrst), θ) do
for each θ′′ in FOL-BC-AND(KB,rest,θ′) do
yield θ′′
Figure 9.6
A simple backward-chaining algorithm for ﬁrst-order knowledge bases.
Hostile(Nono)
Enemy(Nono,America)
Owns(Nono,M1)
Missile(M1)
Criminal(West)
Missile(y)
Weapon(y)
Sells(West,M1,z)
American(West)
{y/M1}
{ }
{ }
{ }
 {z/Nono}
{ }
Figure 9.7
Proof tree constructed by backward chaining to prove that West is a criminal.
The tree should be read depth ﬁrst, left to right. To prove Criminal(West), we have to prove
the four conjuncts below it. Some of these are in the knowledge base, and others require
further backward chaining. Bindings for each successful uniﬁcation are shown next to the
corresponding subgoal. Note that once one subgoal in a conjunction succeeds, its substitution
is applied to subsequent subgoals. Thus, by the time FOL-BC-ASK gets to the last conjunct,
originally Hostile(z), z is already bound to Nono.

Section 9.4.
Backward Chaining
339
9.4.2
Logic programming
Logic programming is a technology that comes fairly close to embodying the declarative
ideal described in Chapter 7: that systems should be constructed by expressing knowledge in
a formal language and that problems should be solved by running inference processes on that
knowledge. The ideal is summed up in Robert Kowalski’s equation,
Algorithm = Logic + Control .
Prolog is the most widely used logic programming language. It is used primarily as a rapid-
PROLOG
prototyping language and for symbol-manipulation tasks such as writing compilers (Van Roy,
1990) and parsing natural language (Pereira and Warren, 1980). Many expert systems have
been written in Prolog for legal, medical, ﬁnancial, and other domains.
Prolog programs are sets of deﬁnite clauses written in a notation somewhat different
from standard ﬁrst-order logic. Prolog uses uppercase letters for variables and lowercase for
constants—the opposite of our convention for logic. Commas separate conjuncts in a clause,
and the clause is written “backwards” from what we are used to; instead of A ∧B ⇒C in
Prolog we have C :- A, B. Here is a typical example:
criminal(X) :- american(X), weapon(Y), sells(X,Y,Z), hostile(Z).
The notation [E|L] denotes a list whose ﬁrst element is E and whose rest is L. Here is a
Prolog program for append(X,Y,Z), which succeeds if list Z is the result of appending
lists X and Y:
append([],Y,Y).
append([A|X],Y,[A|Z]) :- append(X,Y,Z).
In English, we can read these clauses as (1) appending an empty list with a list Y produces
the same list Y and (2) [A|Z] is the result of appending [A|X] onto Y, provided that Z is
the result of appending X onto Y. In most high-level languages we can write a similar recur-
sive function that describes how to append two lists. The Prolog deﬁnition is actually much
more powerful, however, because it describes a relation that holds among three arguments,
rather than a function computed from two arguments. For example, we can ask the query
append(X,Y,[1,2]): what two lists can be appended to give [1,2]? We get back the
solutions
X=[]
Y=[1,2];
X=[1]
Y=[2];
X=[1,2] Y=[]
The execution of Prolog programs is done through depth-ﬁrst backward chaining, where
clauses are tried in the order in which they are written in the knowledge base. Some aspects
of Prolog fall outside standard logical inference:
• Prolog uses the database semantics of Section 8.2.8 rather than ﬁrst-order semantics,
and this is apparent in its treatment of equality and negation (see Section 9.4.5).
• There is a set of built-in functions for arithmetic. Literals using these function symbols
are “proved” by executing code rather than doing further inference. For example, the

340
Chapter
9.
Inference in First-Order Logic
goal “X is 4+3” succeeds with X bound to 7. On the other hand, the goal “5 is X+Y”
fails, because the built-in functions do not do arbitrary equation solving.5
• There are built-in predicates that have side effects when executed. These include input–
output predicates and the assert/retract predicates for modifying the knowledge
base. Such predicates have no counterpart in logic and can produce confusing results—
for example, if facts are asserted in a branch of the proof tree that eventually fails.
• The occur check is omitted from Prolog’s uniﬁcation algorithm. This means that some
unsound inferences can be made; these are almost never a problem in practice.
• Prolog uses depth-ﬁrst backward-chaining search with no checks for inﬁnite recursion.
This makes it very fast when given the right set of axioms, but incomplete when given
the wrong ones.
Prolog’s design represents a compromise between declarativeness and execution efﬁciency—
inasmuch as efﬁciency was understood at the time Prolog was designed.
9.4.3
Efﬁcient implementation of logic programs
The execution of a Prolog program can happen in two modes: interpreted and compiled.
Interpretation essentially amounts to running the FOL-BC-ASK algorithm from Figure 9.6,
with the program as the knowledge base. We say “essentially” because Prolog interpreters
contain a variety of improvements designed to maximize speed. Here we consider only two.
First, our implementation had to explicitly manage the iteration over possible results
generated by each of the subfunctions.
Prolog interpreters have a global data structure,
a stack of choice points, to keep track of the multiple possibilities that we considered in
CHOICE POINT
FOL-BC-OR. This global stack is more efﬁcient, and it makes debugging easier, because
the debugger can move up and down the stack.
Second, our simple implementation of FOL-BC-ASK spends a good deal of time gener-
ating substitutions. Instead of explicitly constructing substitutions, Prolog has logic variables
that remember their current binding. At any point in time, every variable in the program ei-
ther is unbound or is bound to some value. Together, these variables and values implicitly
deﬁne the substitution for the current branch of the proof. Extending the path can only add
new variable bindings, because an attempt to add a different binding for an already bound
variable results in a failure of uniﬁcation. When a path in the search fails, Prolog will back
up to a previous choice point, and then it might have to unbind some variables. This is done
by keeping track of all the variables that have been bound in a stack called the trail. As each
TRAIL
new variable is bound by UNIFY-VAR, the variable is pushed onto the trail. When a goal fails
and it is time to back up to a previous choice point, each of the variables is unbound as it is
removed from the trail.
Even the most efﬁcient Prolog interpreters require several thousand machine instruc-
tions per inference step because of the cost of index lookup, uniﬁcation, and building the
recursive call stack. In effect, the interpreter always behaves as if it has never seen the pro-
gram before; for example, it has to ﬁnd clauses that match the goal. A compiled Prolog
5 Note that if the Peano axioms are provided, such goals can be solved by inference within a Prolog program.

Section 9.4.
Backward Chaining
341
procedure APPEND(ax,y,az,continuation)
trail ←GLOBAL-TRAIL-POINTER()
if ax = [ ] and UNIFY(y,az) then CALL(continuation)
RESET-TRAIL(trail)
a, x, z ←NEW-VARIABLE(), NEW-VARIABLE(), NEW-VARIABLE()
if UNIFY(ax,[a | x]) and UNIFY(az,[a | z]) then APPEND(x,y,z,continuation)
Figure 9.8
Pseudocode representing the result of compiling the Append predicate. The
function NEW-VARIABLE returns a new variable, distinct from all other variables used so far.
The procedure CALL(continuation) continues execution with the speciﬁed continuation.
program, on the other hand, is an inference procedure for a speciﬁc set of clauses, so it knows
what clauses match the goal. Prolog basically generates a miniature theorem prover for each
different predicate, thereby eliminating much of the overhead of interpretation. It is also pos-
sible to open-code the uniﬁcation routine for each different call, thereby avoiding explicit
OPEN-CODE
analysis of term structure. (For details of open-coded uniﬁcation, see Warren et al. (1977).)
The instruction sets of today’s computers give a poor match with Prolog’s semantics,
so most Prolog compilers compile into an intermediate language rather than directly into ma-
chine language. The most popular intermediate language is the Warren Abstract Machine,
or WAM, named after David H. D. Warren, one of the implementers of the ﬁrst Prolog com-
piler. The WAM is an abstract instruction set that is suitable for Prolog and can be either
interpreted or translated into machine language. Other compilers translate Prolog into a high-
level language such as Lisp or C and then use that language’s compiler to translate to machine
language. For example, the deﬁnition of the Append predicate can be compiled into the code
shown in Figure 9.8. Several points are worth mentioning:
• Rather than having to search the knowledge base for Append clauses, the clauses be-
come a procedure and the inferences are carried out simply by calling the procedure.
• As described earlier, the current variable bindings are kept on a trail. The ﬁrst step of the
procedure saves the current state of the trail, so that it can be restored by RESET-TRAIL
if the ﬁrst clause fails. This will undo any bindings generated by the ﬁrst call to UNIFY.
• The trickiest part is the use of continuations to implement choice points. You can think
CONTINUATION
of a continuation as packaging up a procedure and a list of arguments that together
deﬁne what should be done next whenever the current goal succeeds. It would not
do just to return from a procedure like APPEND when the goal succeeds, because it
could succeed in several ways, and each of them has to be explored. The continuation
argument solves this problem because it can be called each time the goal succeeds. In
the APPEND code, if the ﬁrst argument is empty and the second argument uniﬁes with
the third, then the APPEND predicate has succeeded. We then CALL the continuation,
with the appropriate bindings on the trail, to do whatever should be done next. For
example, if the call to APPEND were at the top level, the continuation would print the
bindings of the variables.

342
Chapter
9.
Inference in First-Order Logic
Before Warren’s work on the compilation of inference in Prolog, logic programming was
too slow for general use. Compilers by Warren and others allowed Prolog code to achieve
speeds that are competitive with C on a variety of standard benchmarks (Van Roy, 1990).
Of course, the fact that one can write a planner or natural language parser in a few dozen
lines of Prolog makes it somewhat more desirable than C for prototyping most small-scale AI
research projects.
Parallelization can also provide substantial speedup. There are two principal sources of
parallelism. The ﬁrst, called OR-parallelism, comes from the possibility of a goal unifying
OR-PARALLELISM
with many different clauses in the knowledge base. Each gives rise to an independent branch
in the search space that can lead to a potential solution, and all such branches can be solved
in parallel. The second, called AND-parallelism, comes from the possibility of solving
AND-PARALLELISM
each conjunct in the body of an implication in parallel. AND-parallelism is more difﬁcult to
achieve, because solutions for the whole conjunction require consistent bindings for all the
variables. Each conjunctive branch must communicate with the other branches to ensure a
global solution.
9.4.4
Redundant inference and inﬁnite loops
We now turn to the Achilles heel of Prolog: the mismatch between depth-ﬁrst search and
search trees that include repeated states and inﬁnite paths. Consider the following logic pro-
gram that decides if a path exists between two points on a directed graph:
path(X,Z) :- link(X,Z).
path(X,Z) :- path(X,Y), link(Y,Z).
A simple three-node graph, described by the facts link(a,b) and link(b,c), is shown
in Figure 9.9(a). With this program, the query path(a,c) generates the proof tree shown
in Figure 9.10(a). On the other hand, if we put the two clauses in the order
path(X,Z) :- path(X,Y), link(Y,Z).
path(X,Z) :- link(X,Z).
then Prolog follows the inﬁnite path shown in Figure 9.10(b). Prolog is therefore incomplete
as a theorem prover for deﬁnite clauses—even for Datalog programs, as this example shows—
because, for some knowledge bases, it fails to prove sentences that are entailed. Notice that
forward chaining does not suffer from this problem: once path(a,b), path(b,c), and
path(a,c) are inferred, forward chaining halts.
Depth-ﬁrst backward chaining also has problems with redundant computations. For
example, when ﬁnding a path from A1 to J4 in Figure 9.9(b), Prolog performs 877 inferences,
most of which involve ﬁnding all possible paths to nodes from which the goal is unreachable.
This is similar to the repeated-state problem discussed in Chapter 3. The total amount of
inference can be exponential in the number of ground facts that are generated. If we apply
forward chaining instead, at most n2 path(X,Y) facts can be generated linking n nodes.
For the problem in Figure 9.9(b), only 62 inferences are needed.
Forward chaining on graph search problems is an example of dynamic programming,
DYNAMIC
PROGRAMMING
in which the solutions to subproblems are constructed incrementally from those of smaller

Section 9.4.
Backward Chaining
343
(a)
(b)
A
B
C
A1
J4
Figure 9.9
(a) Finding a path from A to C can lead Prolog into an inﬁnite loop. (b) A
graph in which each node is connected to two random successors in the next layer. Finding a
path from A1 to J4 requires 877 inferences.
path(a,c)
fail
{
}
/
Y b
{ }
link(a,c)
path(a,Y)
link(a,Y)
link(b,c)
path(a,c)
path(a,Y)
link(Y,c)
path(a,Y’)
link(Y’,Y)
(a)
(b)
Figure 9.10
(a) Proof that a path exists from A to C. (b) Inﬁnite proof tree generated
when the clauses are in the “wrong” order.
subproblems and are cached to avoid recomputation. We can obtain a similar effect in a
backward chaining system using memoization—that is, caching solutions to subgoals as
they are found and then reusing those solutions when the subgoal recurs, rather than repeat-
ing the previous computation. This is the approach taken by tabled logic programming sys-
TABLED LOGIC
PROGRAMMING
tems, which use efﬁcient storage and retrieval mechanisms to perform memoization. Tabled
logic programming combines the goal-directedness of backward chaining with the dynamic-
programming efﬁciency of forward chaining. It is also complete for Datalog knowledge
bases, which means that the programmer need worry less about inﬁnite loops. (It is still pos-
sible to get an inﬁnite loop with predicates like father(X,Y) that refer to a potentially
unbounded number of objects.)
9.4.5
Database semantics of Prolog
Prolog uses database semantics, as discussed in Section 8.2.8. The unique names assumption
says that every Prolog constant and every ground term refers to a distinct object, and the
closed world assumption says that the only sentences that are true are those that are entailed

344
Chapter
9.
Inference in First-Order Logic
by the knowledge base. There is no way to assert that a sentence is false in Prolog. This makes
Prolog less expressive than ﬁrst-order logic, but it is part of what makes Prolog more efﬁcient
and more concise. Consider the following Prolog assertions about some course offerings:
Course(CS, 101), Course(CS, 102), Course(CS, 106), Course(EE, 101). (9.11)
Under the unique names assumption, CS and EE are different (as are 101, 102, and 106),
so this means that there are four distinct courses. Under the closed-world assumption there
are no other courses, so there are exactly four courses. But if these were assertions in FOL
rather than in Prolog, then all we could say is that there are somewhere between one and
inﬁnity courses. That’s because the assertions (in FOL) do not deny the possibility that other
unmentioned courses are also offered, nor do they say that the courses mentioned are different
from each other. If we wanted to translate Equation (9.11) into FOL, we would get this:
Course(d, n)
⇔
(d = CS ∧n = 101) ∨(d = CS ∧n = 102)
∨(d = CS ∧n = 106) ∨(d = EE ∧n = 101) .
(9.12)
This is called the completion of Equation (9.11). It expresses in FOL the idea that there are
COMPLETION
at most four courses. To express in FOL the idea that there are at least four courses, we need
to write the completion of the equality predicate:
x = y
⇔
(x = CS ∧y = CS) ∨(x = EE ∧y = EE) ∨(x = 101 ∧y = 101)
∨(x = 102 ∧y = 102) ∨(x = 106 ∧y = 106) .
The completion is useful for understanding database semantics, but for practical purposes, if
your problem can be described with database semantics, it is more efﬁcient to reason with
Prolog or some other database semantics system, rather than translating into FOL and rea-
soning with a full FOL theorem prover.
9.4.6
Constraint logic programming
In our discussion of forward chaining (Section 9.3), we showed how constraint satisfaction
problems (CSPs) can be encoded as deﬁnite clauses. Standard Prolog solves such problems
in exactly the same way as the backtracking algorithm given in Figure 6.5.
Because backtracking enumerates the domains of the variables, it works only for ﬁnite-
domain CSPs. In Prolog terms, there must be a ﬁnite number of solutions for any goal
with unbound variables. (For example, the goal diff(Q,SA), which says that Queensland
and South Australia must be different colors, has six solutions if three colors are allowed.)
Inﬁnite-domain CSPs—for example, with integer or real-valued variables—require quite dif-
ferent algorithms, such as bounds propagation or linear programming.
Consider the following example. We deﬁne triangle(X,Y,Z) as a predicate that
holds if the three arguments are numbers that satisfy the triangle inequality:
triangle(X,Y,Z) :-
X>0, Y>0, Z>0, X+Y>=Z, Y+Z>=X, X+Z>=Y.
If we ask Prolog the query triangle(3,4,5), it succeeds. On the other hand, if we
ask triangle(3,4,Z), no solution will be found, because the subgoal Z>=0 cannot be
handled by Prolog; we can’t compare an unbound value to 0.

Section 9.5.
Resolution
345
Constraint logic programming (CLP) allows variables to be constrained rather than
CONSTRAINT LOGIC
PROGRAMMING
bound. A CLP solution is the most speciﬁc set of constraints on the query variables that can
be derived from the knowledge base. For example, the solution to the triangle(3,4,Z)
query is the constraint 7 >= Z >= 1. Standard logic programs are just a special case of
CLP in which the solution constraints must be equality constraints—that is, bindings.
CLP systems incorporate various constraint-solving algorithms for the constraints al-
lowed in the language. For example, a system that allows linear inequalities on real-valued
variables might include a linear programming algorithm for solving those constraints. CLP
systems also adopt a much more ﬂexible approach to solving standard logic programming
queries. For example, instead of depth-ﬁrst, left-to-right backtracking, they might use any of
the more efﬁcient algorithms discussed in Chapter 6, including heuristic conjunct ordering,
backjumping, cutset conditioning, and so on. CLP systems therefore combine elements of
constraint satisfaction algorithms, logic programming, and deductive databases.
Several systems that allow the programmer more control over the search order for in-
ference have been deﬁned. The MRS language (Genesereth and Smith, 1981; Russell, 1985)
allows the programmer to write metarules to determine which conjuncts are tried ﬁrst. The
METARULE
user could write a rule saying that the goal with the fewest variables should be tried ﬁrst or
could write domain-speciﬁc rules for particular predicates.
9.5
RESOLUTION
The last of our three families of logical systems is based on resolution. We saw on page 250
that propositional resolution using refutation is a complete inference procedure for proposi-
tional logic. In this section, we describe how to extend resolution to ﬁrst-order logic.
9.5.1
Conjunctive normal form for ﬁrst-order logic
As in the propositional case, ﬁrst-order resolution requires that sentences be in conjunctive
normal form (CNF)—that is, a conjunction of clauses, where each clause is a disjunction of
literals.6 Literals can contain variables, which are assumed to be universally quantiﬁed. For
example, the sentence
∀x American(x) ∧Weapon(y) ∧Sells(x, y, z) ∧Hostile(z) ⇒Criminal(x)
becomes, in CNF,
¬American(x) ∨¬Weapon(y) ∨¬Sells(x, y, z) ∨¬Hostile(z) ∨Criminal(x) .
Every sentence of ﬁrst-order logic can be converted into an inferentially equivalent CNF
sentence. In particular, the CNF sentence will be unsatisﬁable just when the original sentence
is unsatisﬁable, so we have a basis for doing proofs by contradiction on the CNF sentences.
6 A clause can also be represented as an implication with a conjunction of atoms in the premise and a disjunction
of atoms in the conclusion (Exercise 7.13). This is called implicative normal form or Kowalski form (especially
when written with a right-to-left implication symbol (Kowalski, 1979)) and is often much easier to read.

346
Chapter
9.
Inference in First-Order Logic
The procedure for conversion to CNF is similar to the propositional case, which we saw
on page 253. The principal difference arises from the need to eliminate existential quantiﬁers.
We illustrate the procedure by translating the sentence “Everyone who loves all animals is
loved by someone,” or
∀x [∀y Animal(y) ⇒Loves(x, y)] ⇒[∃y Loves(y, x)] .
The steps are as follows:
• Eliminate implications:
∀x [¬∀y ¬Animal(y) ∨Loves(x, y)] ∨[∃y Loves(y, x)] .
• Move ¬ inwards: In addition to the usual rules for negated connectives, we need rules
for negated quantiﬁers. Thus, we have
¬∀x p
becomes
∃x ¬p
¬∃x p
becomes
∀x ¬p .
Our sentence goes through the following transformations:
∀x [∃y ¬(¬Animal(y) ∨Loves(x, y))] ∨[∃y Loves(y, x)] .
∀x [∃y ¬¬Animal(y) ∧¬Loves(x, y)] ∨[∃y Loves(y, x)] .
∀x [∃y Animal(y) ∧¬Loves(x, y)] ∨[∃y Loves(y, x)] .
Notice how a universal quantiﬁer (∀y) in the premise of the implication has become
an existential quantiﬁer. The sentence now reads “Either there is some animal that x
doesn’t love, or (if this is not the case) someone loves x.” Clearly, the meaning of the
original sentence has been preserved.
• Standardize variables: For sentences like (∃x P(x))∨(∃x Q(x)) which use the same
variable name twice, change the name of one of the variables. This avoids confusion
later when we drop the quantiﬁers. Thus, we have
∀x [∃y Animal(y) ∧¬Loves(x, y)] ∨[∃z Loves(z, x)] .
• Skolemize: Skolemization is the process of removing existential quantiﬁers by elimi-
SKOLEMIZATION
nation. In the simple case, it is just like the Existential Instantiation rule of Section 9.1:
translate ∃x P(x) into P(A), where A is a new constant. However, we can’t apply Ex-
istential Instantiation to our sentence above because it doesn’t match the pattern ∃v α;
only parts of the sentence match the pattern. If we blindly apply the rule to the two
matching parts we get
∀x [Animal(A) ∧¬Loves(x, A)] ∨Loves(B, x) ,
which has the wrong meaning entirely: it says that everyone either fails to love a par-
ticular animal A or is loved by some particular entity B. In fact, our original sentence
allows each person to fail to love a different animal or to be loved by a different person.
Thus, we want the Skolem entities to depend on x and z:
∀x [Animal(F(x)) ∧¬Loves(x, F(x))] ∨Loves(G(z), x) .
Here F and G are Skolem functions. The general rule is that the arguments of the
SKOLEM FUNCTION
Skolem function are all the universally quantiﬁed variables in whose scope the exis-
tential quantiﬁer appears. As with Existential Instantiation, the Skolemized sentence is
satisﬁable exactly when the original sentence is satisﬁable.

Section 9.5.
Resolution
347
• Drop universal quantiﬁers: At this point, all remaining variables must be universally
quantiﬁed. Moreover, the sentence is equivalent to one in which all the universal quan-
tiﬁers have been moved to the left. We can therefore drop the universal quantiﬁers:
[Animal(F(x)) ∧¬Loves(x, F(x))] ∨Loves(G(z), x) .
• Distribute ∨over ∧:
[Animal(F(x)) ∨Loves(G(z), x)] ∧[¬Loves(x, F(x)) ∨Loves(G(z), x)] .
This step may also require ﬂattening out nested conjunctions and disjunctions.
The sentence is now in CNF and consists of two clauses. It is quite unreadable. (It may
help to explain that the Skolem function F(x) refers to the animal potentially unloved by x,
whereas G(z) refers to someone who might love x.) Fortunately, humans seldom need look
at CNF sentences—the translation process is easily automated.
9.5.2
The resolution inference rule
The resolution rule for ﬁrst-order clauses is simply a lifted version of the propositional reso-
lution rule given on page 253. Two clauses, which are assumed to be standardized apart so
that they share no variables, can be resolved if they contain complementary literals. Propo-
sitional literals are complementary if one is the negation of the other; ﬁrst-order literals are
complementary if one uniﬁes with the negation of the other. Thus, we have
ℓ1 ∨· · · ∨ℓk,
m1 ∨· · · ∨mn
SUBST(θ, ℓ1 ∨· · · ∨ℓi−1 ∨ℓi+1 ∨· · · ∨ℓk ∨m1 ∨· · · ∨mj−1 ∨mj+1 ∨· · · ∨mn)
where UNIFY(ℓi, ¬mj) = θ. For example, we can resolve the two clauses
[Animal(F(x)) ∨Loves(G(x), x)]
and
[¬Loves(u, v) ∨¬Kills(u, v)]
by eliminating the complementary literals Loves(G(x), x) and ¬Loves(u, v), with uniﬁer
θ = {u/G(x), v/x}, to produce the resolvent clause
[Animal(F(x)) ∨¬Kills(G(x), x)] .
This rule is called the binary resolution rule because it resolves exactly two literals. The
BINARY RESOLUTION
binary resolution rule by itself does not yield a complete inference procedure. The full reso-
lution rule resolves subsets of literals in each clause that are uniﬁable. An alternative approach
is to extend factoring—the removal of redundant literals—to the ﬁrst-order case. Proposi-
tional factoring reduces two literals to one if they are identical; ﬁrst-order factoring reduces
two literals to one if they are uniﬁable. The uniﬁer must be applied to the entire clause. The
combination of binary resolution and factoring is complete.
9.5.3
Example proofs
Resolution proves that KB |= α by proving KB ∧¬α unsatisﬁable, that is, by deriving the
empty clause. The algorithmic approach is identical to the propositional case, described in

348
Chapter
9.
Inference in First-Order Logic
¬American(x)    ¬Weapon(y)    ¬Sells(x,y,z)   ¬Hostile(z)   Criminal(x)
¬Criminal(West)
¬Enemy(Nono,America)
Enemy(Nono,America)
¬Missile(x)   Weapon(x)
¬Weapon(y)   ¬Sells(West,y,z)   ¬Hostile(z)
Missile(M1)
¬Missile(y)   ¬Sells(West,y,z)   ¬Hostile(z)
¬Missile(x)   ¬Owns(Nono,x)    Sells(West,x,Nono)
¬Sells(West,M1,z)   ¬Hostile(z)
¬American(West)   ¬Weapon(y)   ¬Sells(West,y,z)   ¬Hostile(z)
American(West)
¬Missile(M1)   ¬Owns(Nono,M1)   ¬Hostile(Nono)
Missile(M1)
¬Owns(Nono,M1)   ¬Hostile(Nono)
Owns(Nono,M1)
¬Enemy(x,America)   Hostile(x)
¬Hostile(Nono)
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
Figure 9.11
A resolution proof that West is a criminal. At each step, the literals that unify
are in bold.
Figure 7.12, so we need not repeat it here. Instead, we give two example proofs. The ﬁrst is
the crime example from Section 9.3. The sentences in CNF are
¬American(x) ∨¬Weapon(y) ∨¬Sells(x, y, z) ∨¬Hostile(z) ∨Criminal(x)
¬Missile(x) ∨¬Owns(Nono, x) ∨Sells(West, x, Nono)
¬Enemy(x, America) ∨Hostile(x)
¬Missile(x) ∨Weapon(x)
Owns(Nono, M1)
Missile(M1)
American(West)
Enemy(Nono, America) .
We also include the negated goal ¬Criminal(West). The resolution proof is shown in Fig-
ure 9.11. Notice the structure: single “spine” beginning with the goal clause, resolving against
clauses from the knowledge base until the empty clause is generated. This is characteristic
of resolution on Horn clause knowledge bases. In fact, the clauses along the main spine
correspond exactly to the consecutive values of the goals variable in the backward-chaining
algorithm of Figure 9.6. This is because we always choose to resolve with a clause whose
positive literal uniﬁed with the leftmost literal of the “current” clause on the spine; this is
exactly what happens in backward chaining. Thus, backward chaining is just a special case
of resolution with a particular control strategy to decide which resolution to perform next.
Our second example makes use of Skolemization and involves clauses that are not def-
inite clauses. This results in a somewhat more complex proof structure. In English, the
problem is as follows:
Everyone who loves all animals is loved by someone.
Anyone who kills an animal is loved by no one.
Jack loves all animals.
Either Jack or Curiosity killed the cat, who is named Tuna.
Did Curiosity kill the cat?

Section 9.5.
Resolution
349
First, we express the original sentences, some background knowledge, and the negated goal
G in ﬁrst-order logic:
A.
∀x [∀y Animal(y) ⇒Loves(x, y)] ⇒[∃y Loves(y, x)]
B.
∀x [∃z Animal(z) ∧Kills(x, z)] ⇒[∀y ¬Loves(y, x)]
C.
∀x Animal(x) ⇒Loves(Jack, x)
D.
Kills(Jack, Tuna) ∨Kills(Curiosity, Tuna)
E.
Cat(Tuna)
F.
∀x Cat(x) ⇒Animal(x)
¬G.
¬Kills(Curiosity, Tuna)
Now we apply the conversion procedure to convert each sentence to CNF:
A1.
Animal(F(x)) ∨Loves(G(x), x)
A2.
¬Loves(x, F(x)) ∨Loves(G(x), x)
B.
¬Loves(y, x) ∨¬Animal(z) ∨¬Kills(x, z)
C.
¬Animal(x) ∨Loves(Jack, x)
D.
Kills(Jack, Tuna) ∨Kills(Curiosity, Tuna)
E.
Cat(Tuna)
F.
¬Cat(x) ∨Animal(x)
¬G.
¬Kills(Curiosity, Tuna)
The resolution proof that Curiosity killed the cat is given in Figure 9.12. In English, the proof
could be paraphrased as follows:
Suppose Curiosity did not kill Tuna. We know that either Jack or Curiosity did; thus
Jack must have. Now, Tuna is a cat and cats are animals, so Tuna is an animal. Because
anyone who kills an animal is loved by no one, we know that no one loves Jack. On the
other hand, Jack loves all animals, so someone loves him; so we have a contradiction.
Therefore, Curiosity killed the cat.
¬Loves(y, Jack)
Loves(G(Jack), Jack)
¬Kills(Curiosity, Tuna)
Kills(Jack, Tuna)   Kills(Curiosity, Tuna)
¬Cat(x)   Animal(x)
Cat(Tuna)
¬Animal(F(Jack))   Loves(G(Jack), Jack)
Animal(F(x))   Loves(G(x), x) 
¬Loves(y, x)   ¬Kills(x, Tuna)
Kills(Jack, Tuna)
¬Loves(y, x)   ¬Animal(z)   ¬Kills(x, z)
Animal(Tuna)
¬Loves(x,F(x))   Loves(G(x), x)
¬Animal(x)   Loves(Jack, x)
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
Figure 9.12
A resolution proof that Curiosity killed the cat. Notice the use of factoring
in the derivation of the clause Loves(G(Jack), Jack). Notice also in the upper right, the
uniﬁcation of Loves(x, F(x)) and Loves(Jack, x) can only succeed after the variables have
been standardized apart.

350
Chapter
9.
Inference in First-Order Logic
The proof answers the question “Did Curiosity kill the cat?” but often we want to pose more
general questions, such as “Who killed the cat?” Resolution can do this, but it takes a little
more work to obtain the answer. The goal is ∃w Kills(w, Tuna), which, when negated,
becomes ¬Kills(w, Tuna) in CNF. Repeating the proof in Figure 9.12 with the new negated
goal, we obtain a similar proof tree, but with the substitution {w/Curiosity} in one of the
steps. So, in this case, ﬁnding out who killed the cat is just a matter of keeping track of the
bindings for the query variables in the proof.
Unfortunately, resolution can produce nonconstructive proofs for existential goals.
NONCONSTRUCTIVE
PROOF
For example, ¬Kills(w, Tuna) resolves with Kills(Jack, Tuna) ∨Kills(Curiosity, Tuna)
to give Kills(Jack, Tuna), which resolves again with ¬Kills(w, Tuna) to yield the empty
clause. Notice that w has two different bindings in this proof; resolution is telling us that,
yes, someone killed Tuna—either Jack or Curiosity. This is no great surprise! One so-
lution is to restrict the allowed resolution steps so that the query variables can be bound
only once in a given proof; then we need to be able to backtrack over the possible bind-
ings. Another solution is to add a special answer literal to the negated goal, which be-
ANSWER LITERAL
comes ¬Kills(w, Tuna) ∨Answer(w). Now, the resolution process generates an answer
whenever a clause is generated containing just a single answer literal. For the proof in Fig-
ure 9.12, this is Answer(Curiosity). The nonconstructive proof would generate the clause
Answer(Curiosity) ∨Answer(Jack), which does not constitute an answer.
9.5.4
Completeness of resolution
This section gives a completeness proof of resolution. It can be safely skipped by those who
are willing to take it on faith.
We show that resolution is refutation-complete, which means that if a set of sentences
REFUTATION
COMPLETENESS
is unsatisﬁable, then resolution will always be able to derive a contradiction. Resolution
cannot be used to generate all logical consequences of a set of sentences, but it can be used
to establish that a given sentence is entailed by the set of sentences. Hence, it can be used to
ﬁnd all answers to a given question, Q(x), by proving that KB ∧¬Q(x) is unsatisﬁable.
We take it as given that any sentence in ﬁrst-order logic (without equality) can be rewrit-
ten as a set of clauses in CNF. This can be proved by induction on the form of the sentence,
using atomic sentences as the base case (Davis and Putnam, 1960). Our goal therefore is to
prove the following: if S is an unsatisﬁable set of clauses, then the application of a ﬁnite
number of resolution steps to S will yield a contradiction.
Our proof sketch follows Robinson’s original proof with some simpliﬁcations from
Genesereth and Nilsson (1987). The basic structure of the proof (Figure 9.13) is as follows:
1. First, we observe that if S is unsatisﬁable, then there exists a particular set of ground
instances of the clauses of S such that this set is also unsatisﬁable (Herbrand’s theorem).
2. We then appeal to the ground resolution theorem given in Chapter 7, which states that
propositional resolution is complete for ground sentences.
3. We then use a lifting lemma to show that, for any propositional resolution proof using
the set of ground sentences, there is a corresponding ﬁrst-order resolution proof using
the ﬁrst-order sentences from which the ground sentences were obtained.

Section 9.5.
Resolution
351
Resolution can find a contradiction in S'
There is a resolution proof for the contradiction in S'
Herbrand’s theorem
Some set S' of ground instances is unsatisfiable
Any set of sentences S is representable in clausal form
Assume S is unsatisfiable, and in clausal form
Lifting lemma
Ground resolution
theorem
Figure 9.13
Structure of a completeness proof for resolution.
To carry out the ﬁrst step, we need three new concepts:
• Herbrand universe: If S is a set of clauses, then HS, the Herbrand universe of S, is
HERBRAND
UNIVERSE
the set of all ground terms constructable from the following:
a. The function symbols in S, if any.
b. The constant symbols in S, if any; if none, then the constant symbol A.
For example, if S contains just the clause ¬P(x, F(x, A))∨¬Q(x, A)∨R(x, B), then
HS is the following inﬁnite set of ground terms:
{A, B, F(A, A), F(A, B), F(B, A), F(B, B), F(A, F(A, A)), . . .} .
• Saturation: If S is a set of clauses and P is a set of ground terms, then P(S), the
SATURATION
saturation of S with respect to P, is the set of all ground clauses obtained by applying
all possible consistent substitutions of ground terms in P with variables in S.
• Herbrand base: The saturation of a set S of clauses with respect to its Herbrand uni-
HERBRAND BASE
verse is called the Herbrand base of S, written as HS(S). For example, if S contains
solely the clause just given, then HS(S) is the inﬁnite set of clauses
{¬P(A, F(A, A)) ∨¬Q(A, A) ∨R(A, B),
¬P(B, F(B, A)) ∨¬Q(B, A) ∨R(B, B),
¬P(F(A, A), F(F(A, A), A)) ∨¬Q(F(A, A), A) ∨R(F(A, A), B),
¬P(F(A, B), F(F(A, B), A)) ∨¬Q(F(A, B), A) ∨R(F(A, B), B), . . . }
These deﬁnitions allow us to state a form of Herbrand’s theorem (Herbrand, 1930):
HERBRAND’S
THEOREM
If a set S of clauses is unsatisﬁable, then there exists a ﬁnite subset of HS(S) that
is also unsatisﬁable.
Let S′ be this ﬁnite subset of ground sentences. Now, we can appeal to the ground resolution
theorem (page 255) to show that the resolution closure RC(S′) contains the empty clause.
That is, running propositional resolution to completion on S′ will derive a contradiction.
Now that we have established that there is always a resolution proof involving some
ﬁnite subset of the Herbrand base of S, the next step is to show that there is a resolution

352
Chapter
9.
Inference in First-Order Logic
G ¨ODEL’S INCOMPLETENESS THEOREM
By slightly extending the language of ﬁrst-order logic to allow for the mathemat-
ical induction schema in arithmetic, Kurt G¨odel was able to show, in his incom-
pleteness theorem, that there are true arithmetic sentences that cannot be proved.
The proof of the incompleteness theorem is somewhat beyond the scope of
this book, occupying, as it does, at least 30 pages, but we can give a hint here. We
begin with the logical theory of numbers. In this theory, there is a single constant,
0, and a single function, S (the successor function). In the intended model, S(0)
denotes 1, S(S(0)) denotes 2, and so on; the language therefore has names for all
the natural numbers. The vocabulary also includes the function symbols +, ×, and
Expt (exponentiation) and the usual set of logical connectives and quantiﬁers. The
ﬁrst step is to notice that the set of sentences that we can write in this language can
be enumerated. (Imagine deﬁning an alphabetical order on the symbols and then
arranging, in alphabetical order, each of the sets of sentences of length 1, 2, and
so on.) We can then number each sentence α with a unique natural number #α
(the G¨odel number). This is crucial: number theory contains a name for each of
its own sentences. Similarly, we can number each possible proof P with a G¨odel
number G(P), because a proof is simply a ﬁnite sequence of sentences.
Now suppose we have a recursively enumerable set A of sentences that are
true statements about the natural numbers. Recalling that A can be named by a
given set of integers, we can imagine writing in our language a sentence α(j, A) of
the following sort:
∀i i is not the G¨odel number of a proof of the sentence whose G¨odel
number is j, where the proof uses only premises in A.
Then let σ be the sentence α(#σ, A), that is, a sentence that states its own unprov-
ability from A. (That this sentence always exists is true but not entirely obvious.)
Now we make the following ingenious argument: Suppose that σ is provable
from A; then σ is false (because σ says it cannot be proved). But then we have a
false sentence that is provable from A, so A cannot consist of only true sentences—
a violation of our premise. Therefore, σ is not provable from A. But this is exactly
what σ itself claims; hence σ is a true sentence.
So, we have shown (barring 29 1
2 pages) that for any set of true sentences of
number theory, and in particular any set of basic axioms, there are other true sen-
tences that cannot be proved from those axioms. This establishes, among other
things, that we can never prove all the theorems of mathematics within any given
system of axioms. Clearly, this was an important discovery for mathematics. Its
signiﬁcance for AI has been widely debated, beginning with speculations by G¨odel
himself. We take up the debate in Chapter 26.

Section 9.5.
Resolution
353
proof using the clauses of S itself, which are not necessarily ground clauses. We start by
considering a single application of the resolution rule. Robinson stated this lemma:
Let C1 and C2 be two clauses with no shared variables, and let C′
1 and C′
2 be
ground instances of C1 and C2. If C′ is a resolvent of C′
1 and C′
2, then there exists
a clause C such that (1) C is a resolvent of C1 and C2 and (2) C′ is a ground
instance of C.
This is called a lifting lemma, because it lifts a proof step from ground clauses up to general
LIFTING LEMMA
ﬁrst-order clauses. In order to prove his basic lifting lemma, Robinson had to invent uniﬁ-
cation and derive all of the properties of most general uniﬁers. Rather than repeat the proof
here, we simply illustrate the lemma:
C1 = ¬P(x, F(x, A)) ∨¬Q(x, A) ∨R(x, B)
C2 = ¬N(G(y), z) ∨P(H(y), z)
C′
1 = ¬P(H(B), F(H(B), A)) ∨¬Q(H(B), A) ∨R(H(B), B)
C′
2 = ¬N(G(B), F(H(B), A)) ∨P(H(B), F(H(B), A))
C′ = ¬N(G(B), F(H(B), A)) ∨¬Q(H(B), A) ∨R(H(B), B)
C = ¬N(G(y), F(H(y), A)) ∨¬Q(H(y), A) ∨R(H(y), B) .
We see that indeed C′ is a ground instance of C. In general, for C′
1 and C′
2 to have any
resolvents, they must be constructed by ﬁrst applying to C1 and C2 the most general uniﬁer
of a pair of complementary literals in C1 and C2. From the lifting lemma, it is easy to derive
a similar statement about any sequence of applications of the resolution rule:
For any clause C′ in the resolution closure of S′ there is a clause C in the resolu-
tion closure of S such that C′ is a ground instance of C and the derivation of C is
the same length as the derivation of C′.
From this fact, it follows that if the empty clause appears in the resolution closure of S′, it
must also appear in the resolution closure of S. This is because the empty clause cannot be a
ground instance of any other clause. To recap: we have shown that if S is unsatisﬁable, then
there is a ﬁnite derivation of the empty clause using the resolution rule.
The lifting of theorem proving from ground clauses to ﬁrst-order clauses provides a vast
increase in power. This increase comes from the fact that the ﬁrst-order proof need instantiate
variables only as far as necessary for the proof, whereas the ground-clause methods were
required to examine a huge number of arbitrary instantiations.
9.5.5
Equality
None of the inference methods described so far in this chapter handle an assertion of the form
x = y. Three distinct approaches can be taken. The ﬁrst approach is to axiomatize equality—
to write down sentences about the equality relation in the knowledge base. We need to say that
equality is reﬂexive, symmetric, and transitive, and we also have to say that we can substitute
equals for equals in any predicate or function. So we need three basic axioms, and then one

354
Chapter
9.
Inference in First-Order Logic
for each predicate and function:
∀x x = x
∀x, y x = y ⇒y = x
∀x, y, z x = y ∧y = z ⇒x = z
∀x, y x = y ⇒(P1(x) ⇔P1(y))
∀x, y x = y ⇒(P2(x) ⇔P2(y))
...
∀w, x, y, z w = y ∧x = z ⇒(F1(w, x) = F1(y, z))
∀w, x, y, z w = y ∧x = z ⇒(F2(w, x) = F2(y, z))
...
Given these sentences, a standard inference procedure such as resolution can perform tasks
requiring equality reasoning, such as solving mathematical equations. However, these axioms
will generate a lot of conclusions, most of them not helpful to a proof. So there has been a
search for more efﬁcient ways of handling equality. One alternative is to add inference rules
rather than axioms. The simplest rule, demodulation, takes a unit clause x = y and some
clause α that contains the term x, and yields a new clause formed by substituting y for x
within α. It works if the term within α uniﬁes with x; it need not be exactly equal to x.
Note that demodulation is directional; given x = y, the x always gets replaced with y, never
vice versa. That means that demodulation can be used for simplifying expressions using
demodulators such as x + 0 = x or x1 = x. As another example, given
Father(Father(x)) = PaternalGrandfather (x)
Birthdate(Father(Father(Bella)), 1926)
we can conclude by demodulation
Birthdate(PaternalGrandfather (Bella), 1926) .
More formally, we have
• Demodulation: For any terms x, y, and z, where z appears somewhere in literal mi
DEMODULATION
and where UNIFY(x, z) = θ,
x = y,
m1 ∨· · · ∨mn
SUB(SUBST(θ, x), SUBST(θ, y), m1 ∨· · · ∨mn) .
where SUBST is the usual substitution of a binding list, and SUB(x, y, m) means to
replace x with y everywhere that x occurs within m.
The rule can also be extended to handle non-unit clauses in which an equality literal appears:
• Paramodulation: For any terms x, y, and z, where z appears somewhere in literal mi,
PARAMODULATION
and where UNIFY(x, z) = θ,
ℓ1 ∨· · · ∨ℓk ∨x = y,
m1 ∨· · · ∨mn
SUB(SUBST(θ, x), SUBST(θ, y), SUBST(θ, ℓ1 ∨· · · ∨ℓk ∨m1 ∨· · · ∨mn) .
For example, from
P(F(x, B), x) ∨Q(x)
and
F(A, y) = y ∨R(y)

Section 9.5.
Resolution
355
we have θ = UNIFY(F(A, y), F(x, B)) = {x/A, y/B}, and we can conclude by paramodu-
lation the sentence
P(B, A) ∨Q(A) ∨R(B) .
Paramodulation yields a complete inference procedure for ﬁrst-order logic with equality.
A third approach handles equality reasoning entirely within an extended uniﬁcation
algorithm. That is, terms are uniﬁable if they are provably equal under some substitution,
where “provably” allows for equality reasoning. For example, the terms 1 + 2 and 2 + 1
normally are not uniﬁable, but a uniﬁcation algorithm that knows that x + y = y + x could
unify them with the empty substitution. Equational uniﬁcation of this kind can be done with
EQUATIONAL
UNIFICATION
efﬁcient algorithms designed for the particular axioms used (commutativity, associativity, and
so on) rather than through explicit inference with those axioms. Theorem provers using this
technique are closely related to the CLP systems described in Section 9.4.
9.5.6
Resolution strategies
We know that repeated applications of the resolution inference rule will eventually ﬁnd a
proof if one exists. In this subsection, we examine strategies that help ﬁnd proofs efﬁciently.
Unit preference: This strategy prefers to do resolutions where one of the sentences is a single
UNIT PREFERENCE
literal (also known as a unit clause). The idea behind the strategy is that we are trying to
produce an empty clause, so it might be a good idea to prefer inferences that produce shorter
clauses. Resolving a unit sentence (such as P) with any other sentence (such as ¬P ∨¬Q∨R)
always yields a clause (in this case, ¬Q ∨R) that is shorter than the other clause. When
the unit preference strategy was ﬁrst tried for propositional inference in 1964, it led to a
dramatic speedup, making it feasible to prove theorems that could not be handled without the
preference. Unit resolution is a restricted form of resolution in which every resolution step
must involve a unit clause. Unit resolution is incomplete in general, but complete for Horn
clauses. Unit resolution proofs on Horn clauses resemble forward chaining.
The OTTER theorem prover (Organized Techniques for Theorem-proving and Effective
Research, McCune, 1992), uses a form of best-ﬁrst search. Its heuristic function measures
the “weight” of each clause, where lighter clauses are preferred. The exact choice of heuristic
is up to the user, but generally, the weight of a clause should be correlated with its size or
difﬁculty. Unit clauses are treated as light; the search can thus be seen as a generalization of
the unit preference strategy.
Set of support: Preferences that try certain resolutions ﬁrst are helpful, but in general it is
SET OF SUPPORT
more effective to try to eliminate some potential resolutions altogether. For example, we can
insist that every resolution step involve at least one element of a special set of clauses—the
set of support. The resolvent is then added into the set of support. If the set of support is
small relative to the whole knowledge base, the search space will be reduced dramatically.
We have to be careful with this approach because a bad choice for the set of support
will make the algorithm incomplete. However, if we choose the set of support S so that the
remainder of the sentences are jointly satisﬁable, then set-of-support resolution is complete.
For example, one can use the negated query as the set of support, on the assumption that the

356
Chapter
9.
Inference in First-Order Logic
original knowledge base is consistent. (After all, if it is not consistent, then the fact that the
query follows from it is vacuous.) The set-of-support strategy has the additional advantage of
generating goal-directed proof trees that are often easy for humans to understand.
Input resolution: In this strategy, every resolution combines one of the input sentences (from
INPUT RESOLUTION
the KB or the query) with some other sentence. The proof in Figure 9.11 on page 348 uses
only input resolutions and has the characteristic shape of a single “spine” with single sen-
tences combining onto the spine. Clearly, the space of proof trees of this shape is smaller
than the space of all proof graphs. In Horn knowledge bases, Modus Ponens is a kind of
input resolution strategy, because it combines an implication from the original KB with some
other sentences. Thus, it is no surprise that input resolution is complete for knowledge bases
that are in Horn form, but incomplete in the general case. The linear resolution strategy is a
LINEAR RESOLUTION
slight generalization that allows P and Q to be resolved together either if P is in the original
KB or if P is an ancestor of Q in the proof tree. Linear resolution is complete.
Subsumption: The subsumption method eliminates all sentences that are subsumed by (that
SUBSUMPTION
is, more speciﬁc than) an existing sentence in the KB. For example, if P(x) is in the KB, then
there is no sense in adding P(A) and even less sense in adding P(A) ∨Q(B). Subsumption
helps keep the KB small and thus helps keep the search space small.
Practical uses of resolution theorem provers
Theorem provers can be applied to the problems involved in the synthesis and veriﬁcation
SYNTHESIS
VERIFICATION
of both hardware and software. Thus, theorem-proving research is carried out in the ﬁelds of
hardware design, programming languages, and software engineering—not just in AI.
In the case of hardware, the axioms describe the interactions between signals and cir-
cuit elements. (See Section 8.4.2 on page 309 for an example.) Logical reasoners designed
specially for veriﬁcation have been able to verify entire CPUs, including their timing prop-
erties (Srivas and Bickford, 1990). The AURA theorem prover has been applied to design
circuits that are more compact than any previous design (Wojciechowski and Wojcik, 1983).
In the case of software, reasoning about programs is quite similar to reasoning about
actions, as in Chapter 7: axioms describe the preconditions and effects of each statement.
The formal synthesis of algorithms was one of the ﬁrst uses of theorem provers, as outlined
by Cordell Green (1969a), who built on earlier ideas by Herbert Simon (1963). The idea
is to constructively prove a theorem to the effect that “there exists a program p satisfying a
certain speciﬁcation.” Although fully automated deductive synthesis, as it is called, has not
DEDUCTIVE
SYNTHESIS
yet become feasible for general-purpose programming, hand-guided deductive synthesis has
been successful in designing several novel and sophisticated algorithms. Synthesis of special-
purpose programs, such as scientiﬁc computing code, is also an active area of research.
Similar techniques are now being applied to software veriﬁcation by systems such as the
SPIN model checker (Holzmann, 1997). For example, the Remote Agent spacecraft control
program was veriﬁed before and after ﬂight (Havelund et al., 2000). The RSA public key
encryption algorithm and the Boyer–Moore string-matching algorithm have been veriﬁed this
way (Boyer and Moore, 1984).

10
CLASSICAL PLANNING
In which we see how an agent can take advantage of the structure of a problem to
construct complex plans of action.
We have deﬁned AI as the study of rational action, which means that planning—devising a
plan of action to achieve one’s goals—is a critical part of AI. We have seen two examples
of planning agents so far: the search-based problem-solving agent of Chapter 3 and the hy-
brid logical agent of Chapter 7. In this chapter we introduce a representation for planning
problems that scales up to problems that could not be handled by those earlier approaches.
Section 10.1 develops an expressive yet carefully constrained language for representing
planning problems. Section 10.2 shows how forward and backward search algorithms can
take advantage of this representation, primarily through accurate heuristics that can be derived
automatically from the structure of the representation. (This is analogous to the way in which
effective domain-independent heuristics were constructed for constraint satisfaction problems
in Chapter 6.) Section 10.3 shows how a data structure called the planning graph can make the
search for a plan more efﬁcient. We then describe a few of the other approaches to planning,
and conclude by comparing the various approaches.
This chapter covers fully observable, deterministic, static environments with single
agents. Chapters 11 and 17 cover partially observable, stochastic, dynamic environments
with multiple agents.
10.1
DEFINITION OF CLASSICAL PLANNING
The problem-solving agent of Chapter 3 can ﬁnd sequences of actions that result in a goal
state. But it deals with atomic representations of states and thus needs good domain-speciﬁc
heuristics to perform well. The hybrid propositional logical agent of Chapter 7 can ﬁnd plans
without domain-speciﬁc heuristics because it uses domain-independent heuristics based on
the logical structure of the problem. But it relies on ground (variable-free) propositional
inference, which means that it may be swamped when there are many actions and states. For
example, in the wumpus world, the simple action of moving a step forward had to be repeated
for all four agent orientations, T time steps, and n2 current locations.
366

Section 10.1.
Deﬁnition of Classical Planning
367
In response to this, planning researchers have settled on a factored representation—
one in which a state of the world is represented by a collection of variables. We use a language
called PDDL, the Planning Domain Deﬁnition Language, that allows us to express all 4Tn2
PDDL
actions with one action schema. There have been several versions of PDDL; we select a
simple version and alter its syntax to be consistent with the rest of the book.1 We now show
how PDDL describes the four things we need to deﬁne a search problem: the initial state, the
actions that are available in a state, the result of applying an action, and the goal test.
Each state is represented as a conjunction of ﬂuents that are ground, functionless atoms.
For example, Poor ∧Unknown might represent the state of a hapless agent, and a state
in a package delivery problem might be At(Truck 1, Melbourne) ∧At(Truck 2, Sydney).
Database semantics is used: the closed-world assumption means that any ﬂuents that are not
mentioned are false, and the unique names assumption means that Truck 1 and Truck 2 are
distinct. The following ﬂuents are not allowed in a state: At(x, y) (because it is non-ground),
¬Poor (because it is a negation), and At(Father(Fred), Sydney) (because it uses a function
symbol). The representation of states is carefully designed so that a state can be treated
either as a conjunction of ﬂuents, which can be manipulated by logical inference, or as a set
of ﬂuents, which can be manipulated with set operations. The set semantics is sometimes
SET SEMANTICS
easier to deal with.
Actions are described by a set of action schemas that implicitly deﬁne the ACTIONS(s)
and RESULT(s, a) functions needed to do a problem-solving search. We saw in Chapter 7 that
any system for action description needs to solve the frame problem—to say what changes and
what stays the same as the result of the action. Classical planning concentrates on problems
where most actions leave most things unchanged. Think of a world consisting of a bunch of
objects on a ﬂat surface. The action of nudging an object causes that object to change its lo-
cation by a vector Δ. A concise description of the action should mention only Δ; it shouldn’t
have to mention all the objects that stay in place. PDDL does that by specifying the result of
an action in terms of what changes; everything that stays the same is left unmentioned.
A set of ground (variable-free) actions can be represented by a single action schema.
ACTION SCHEMA
The schema is a lifted representation—it lifts the level of reasoning from propositional logic
to a restricted subset of ﬁrst-order logic. For example, here is an action schema for ﬂying a
plane from one location to another:
Action(Fly(p, from, to),
PRECOND:At(p, from) ∧Plane(p) ∧Airport(from) ∧Airport(to)
EFFECT:¬At(p, from) ∧At(p, to))
The schema consists of the action name, a list of all the variables used in the schema, a
precondition and an effect. Although we haven’t said yet how the action schema converts
PRECONDITION
EFFECT
into logical sentences, think of the variables as being universally quantiﬁed. We are free to
choose whatever values we want to instantiate the variables. For example, here is one ground
1 PDDL was derived from the original STRIPS planning language(Fikes and Nilsson, 1971). which is slightly
more restricted than PDDL: STRIPS preconditions and goals cannot contain negative literals.

368
Chapter
10.
Classical Planning
action that results from substituting values for all the variables:
Action(Fly(P1, SFO, JFK),
PRECOND:At(P1, SFO) ∧Plane(P1) ∧Airport(SFO) ∧Airport(JFK)
EFFECT:¬At(P1, SFO) ∧At(P1, JFK))
The precondition and effect of an action are each conjunctions of literals (positive or negated
atomic sentences). The precondition deﬁnes the states in which the action can be executed,
and the effect deﬁnes the result of executing the action. An action a can be executed in state
s if s entails the precondition of a. Entailment can also be expressed with the set semantics:
s |= q iff every positive literal in q is in s and every negated literal in q is not. In formal
notation we say
(a ∈ACTIONS(s)) ⇔s |= PRECOND(a) ,
where any variables in a are universally quantiﬁed. For example,
∀p, from, to (Fly(p, from, to) ∈ACTIONS(s)) ⇔
s |= (At(p, from) ∧Plane(p) ∧Airport(from) ∧Airport(to))
We say that action a is applicable in state s if the preconditions are satisﬁed by s. When
APPLICABLE
an action schema a contains variables, it may have multiple applicable instantiations. For
example, with the initial state deﬁned in Figure 10.1, the Fly action can be instantiated as
Fly(P1, SFO, JFK) or as Fly(P2, JFK , SFO), both of which are applicable in the initial
state. If an action a has v variables, then, in a domain with k unique names of objects, it takes
O(vk) time in the worst case to ﬁnd the applicable ground actions.
Sometimes we want to propositionalize a PDDL problem—replace each action schema
PROPOSITIONALIZE
with a set of ground actions and then use a propositional solver such as SATPLAN to ﬁnd a
solution. However, this is impractical when v and k are large.
The result of executing action a in state s is deﬁned as a state s′ which is represented
by the set of ﬂuents formed by starting with s, removing the ﬂuents that appear as negative
literals in the action’s effects (what we call the delete list or DEL(a)), and adding the ﬂuents
DELETE LIST
that are positive literals in the action’s effects (what we call the add list or ADD(a)):
ADD LIST
RESULT(s, a) = (s −DEL(a)) ∪ADD(a) .
(10.1)
For example, with the action Fly(P1, SFO, JFK), we would remove At(P1, SFO) and add
At(P1, JFK). It is a requirement of action schemas that any variable in the effect must also
appear in the precondition. That way, when the precondition is matched against the state s,
all the variables will be bound, and RESULT(s, a) will therefore have only ground atoms. In
other words, ground states are closed under the RESULT operation.
Also note that the ﬂuents do not explicitly refer to time, as they did in Chapter 7. There
we needed superscripts for time, and successor-state axioms of the form
F t+1 ⇔ActionCausesF t ∨(F t ∧¬ActionCausesNotF t) .
In PDDL the times and states are implicit in the action schemas: the precondition always
refers to time t and the effect to time t + 1.
A set of action schemas serves as a deﬁnition of a planning domain. A speciﬁc problem
within the domain is deﬁned with the addition of an initial state and a goal. The initial

Section 10.1.
Deﬁnition of Classical Planning
369
Init(At(C1, SFO) ∧At(C2, JFK) ∧At(P1, SFO) ∧At(P2, JFK)
∧Cargo(C1) ∧Cargo(C2) ∧Plane(P1) ∧Plane(P2)
∧Airport(JFK) ∧Airport(SFO))
Goal(At(C1, JFK) ∧At(C2, SFO))
Action(Load(c, p, a),
PRECOND: At(c, a) ∧At(p, a) ∧Cargo(c) ∧Plane(p) ∧Airport(a)
EFFECT: ¬ At(c, a) ∧In(c, p))
Action(Unload(c, p, a),
PRECOND: In(c, p) ∧At(p, a) ∧Cargo(c) ∧Plane(p) ∧Airport(a)
EFFECT: At(c, a) ∧¬ In(c, p))
Action(Fly(p, from, to),
PRECOND: At(p, from) ∧Plane(p) ∧Airport(from) ∧Airport(to)
EFFECT: ¬ At(p, from) ∧At(p, to))
Figure 10.1
A PDDL description of an air cargo transportation planning problem.
state is a conjunction of ground atoms. (As with all states, the closed-world assumption is
INITIAL STATE
used, which means that any atoms that are not mentioned are false.) The goal is just like a
GOAL
precondition: a conjunction of literals (positive or negative) that may contain variables, such
as At(p, SFO) ∧Plane(p). Any variables are treated as existentially quantiﬁed, so this goal
is to have any plane at SFO. The problem is solved when we can ﬁnd a sequence of actions
that end in a state s that entails the goal. For example, the state Rich ∧Famous ∧Miserable
entails the goal Rich ∧Famous, and the state Plane(Plane1) ∧At(Plane1, SFO) entails
the goal At(p, SFO) ∧Plane(p).
Now we have deﬁned planning as a search problem: we have an initial state, an ACTIONS
function, a RESULT function, and a goal test. We’ll look at some example problems before
investigating efﬁcient search algorithms.
10.1.1
Example: Air cargo transport
Figure 10.1 shows an air cargo transport problem involving loading and unloading cargo and
ﬂying it from place to place. The problem can be deﬁned with three actions: Load, Unload,
and Fly. The actions affect two predicates: In(c, p) means that cargo c is inside plane p, and
At(x, a) means that object x (either plane or cargo) is at airport a. Note that some care must
be taken to make sure the At predicates are maintained properly. When a plane ﬂies from
one airport to another, all the cargo inside the plane goes with it. In ﬁrst-order logic it would
be easy to quantify over all objects that are inside the plane. But basic PDDL does not have
a universal quantiﬁer, so we need a different solution. The approach we use is to say that a
piece of cargo ceases to be At anywhere when it is In a plane; the cargo only becomes At the
new airport when it is unloaded. So At really means “available for use at a given location.”
The following plan is a solution to the problem:
[Load(C1, P1, SFO), Fly(P1, SFO, JFK ), Unload(C1, P1, JFK),
Load(C2, P2, JFK ), Fly(P2, JFK , SFO), Unload(C2, P2, SFO)] .

370
Chapter
10.
Classical Planning
Finally, there is the problem of spurious actions such as Fly(P1, JFK, JFK ), which should
be a no-op, but which has contradictory effects (according to the deﬁnition, the effect would
include At(P1, JFK) ∧¬At(P1, JFK)). It is common to ignore such problems, because
they seldom cause incorrect plans to be produced. The correct approach is to add inequality
preconditions saying that the from and to airports must be different; see another example of
this in Figure 10.3.
10.1.2
Example: The spare tire problem
Consider the problem of changing a ﬂat tire (Figure 10.2). The goal is to have a good spare
tire properly mounted onto the car’s axle, where the initial state has a ﬂat tire on the axle and
a good spare tire in the trunk. To keep it simple, our version of the problem is an abstract
one, with no sticky lug nuts or other complications. There are just four actions: removing the
spare from the trunk, removing the ﬂat tire from the axle, putting the spare on the axle, and
leaving the car unattended overnight. We assume that the car is parked in a particularly bad
neighborhood, so that the effect of leaving it overnight is that the tires disappear. A solution
to the problem is [Remove(Flat, Axle), Remove(Spare, Trunk), PutOn(Spare, Axle)].
Init(Tire(Flat) ∧Tire(Spare) ∧At(Flat, Axle) ∧At(Spare, Trunk))
Goal(At(Spare, Axle))
Action(Remove(obj , loc),
PRECOND: At(obj , loc)
EFFECT: ¬ At(obj , loc) ∧At(obj , Ground))
Action(PutOn(t, Axle),
PRECOND: Tire(t) ∧At(t, Ground) ∧¬ At(Flat, Axle)
EFFECT: ¬ At(t, Ground) ∧At(t, Axle))
Action(LeaveOvernight,
PRECOND:
EFFECT: ¬ At(Spare, Ground) ∧¬ At(Spare, Axle) ∧¬ At(Spare, Trunk)
∧¬ At(Flat, Ground) ∧¬ At(Flat, Axle) ∧¬ At(Flat, Trunk))
Figure 10.2
The simple spare tire problem.
10.1.3
Example: The blocks world
One of the most famous planning domains is known as the blocks world. This domain
BLOCKS WORLD
consists of a set of cube-shaped blocks sitting on a table.2 The blocks can be stacked, but
only one block can ﬁt directly on top of another. A robot arm can pick up a block and move
it to another position, either on the table or on top of another block. The arm can pick up
only one block at a time, so it cannot pick up a block that has another one on it. The goal will
always be to build one or more stacks of blocks, speciﬁed in terms of what blocks are on top
2 The blocks world used in planning research is much simpler than SHRDLU’s version, shown on page 20.

Section 10.1.
Deﬁnition of Classical Planning
371
Init(On(A, Table) ∧On(B, Table) ∧On(C, A)
∧Block(A) ∧Block(B) ∧Block(C) ∧Clear(B) ∧Clear(C))
Goal(On(A, B) ∧On(B, C))
Action(Move(b, x, y),
PRECOND: On(b, x) ∧Clear(b) ∧Clear(y) ∧Block(b) ∧Block(y) ∧
(b̸=x) ∧(b̸=y) ∧(x̸=y),
EFFECT: On(b, y) ∧Clear(x) ∧¬On(b, x) ∧¬Clear(y))
Action(MoveToTable(b, x),
PRECOND: On(b, x) ∧Clear(b) ∧Block(b) ∧(b̸=x),
EFFECT: On(b, Table) ∧Clear(x) ∧¬On(b, x))
Figure 10.3
A planning problem in the blocks world: building a three-block tower. One
solution is the sequence [MoveToTable(C, A), Move(B, Table, C), Move(A, Table, B)].
Start State
Goal State
B
A
C
A
B
C
Figure 10.4
Diagram of the blocks-world problem in Figure 10.3.
of what other blocks. For example, a goal might be to get block A on B and block B on C
(see Figure 10.4).
We use On(b, x) to indicate that block b is on x, where x is either another block or the
table. The action for moving block b from the top of x to the top of y will be Move(b, x, y).
Now, one of the preconditions on moving b is that no other block be on it. In ﬁrst-order logic,
this would be ¬∃x On(x, b) or, alternatively, ∀x ¬On(x, b). Basic PDDL does not allow
quantiﬁers, so instead we introduce a predicate Clear(x) that is true when nothing is on x.
(The complete problem description is in Figure 10.3.)
The action Move moves a block b from x to y if both b and y are clear. After the move
is made, b is still clear but y is not. A ﬁrst attempt at the Move schema is
Action(Move(b, x, y),
PRECOND:On(b, x) ∧Clear(b) ∧Clear(y),
EFFECT:On(b, y) ∧Clear(x) ∧¬On(b, x) ∧¬Clear(y)) .
Unfortunately, this does not maintain Clear properly when x or y is the table. When x is the
Table, this action has the effect Clear(Table), but the table should not become clear; and
when y = Table, it has the precondition Clear(Table), but the table does not have to be clear

372
Chapter
10.
Classical Planning
for us to move a block onto it. To ﬁx this, we do two things. First, we introduce another
action to move a block b from x to the table:
Action(MoveToTable(b, x),
PRECOND:On(b, x) ∧Clear(b),
EFFECT:On(b, Table) ∧Clear(x) ∧¬On(b, x)) .
Second, we take the interpretation of Clear(x) to be “there is a clear space on x to hold a
block.” Under this interpretation, Clear(Table) will always be true. The only problem is that
nothing prevents the planner from using Move(b, x, Table) instead of MoveToTable(b, x).
We could live with this problem—it will lead to a larger-than-necessary search space, but will
not lead to incorrect answers—or we could introduce the predicate Block and add Block(b)∧
Block(y) to the precondition of Move.
10.1.4
The complexity of classical planning
In this subsection we consider the theoretical complexity of planning and distinguish two
decision problems. PlanSAT is the question of whether there exists any plan that solves a
PLANSAT
planning problem. Bounded PlanSAT asks whether there is a solution of length k or less;
BOUNDED PLANSAT
this can be used to ﬁnd an optimal plan.
The ﬁrst result is that both decision problems are decidable for classical planning. The
proof follows from the fact that the number of states is ﬁnite. But if we add function symbols
to the language, then the number of states becomes inﬁnite, and PlanSAT becomes only
semidecidable: an algorithm exists that will terminate with the correct answer for any solvable
problem, but may not terminate on unsolvable problems. The Bounded PlanSAT problem
remains decidable even in the presence of function symbols. For proofs of the assertions in
this section, see Ghallab et al. (2004).
Both PlanSAT and Bounded PlanSAT are in the complexity class PSPACE, a class that
is larger (and hence more difﬁcult) than NP and refers to problems that can be solved by a
deterministic Turing machine with a polynomial amount of space. Even if we make some
rather severe restrictions, the problems remain quite difﬁcult. For example, if we disallow
negative effects, both problems are still NP-hard. However, if we also disallow negative
preconditions, PlanSAT reduces to the class P.
These worst-case results may seem discouraging. We can take solace in the fact that
agents are usually not asked to ﬁnd plans for arbitrary worst-case problem instances, but
rather are asked for plans in speciﬁc domains (such as blocks-world problems with n blocks),
which can be much easier than the theoretical worst case. For many domains (including the
blocks world and the air cargo world), Bounded PlanSAT is NP-complete while PlanSAT is
in P; in other words, optimal planning is usually hard, but sub-optimal planning is sometimes
easy. To do well on easier-than-worst-case problems, we will need good search heuristics.
That’s the true advantage of the classical planning formalism: it has facilitated the develop-
ment of very accurate domain-independent heuristics, whereas systems based on successor-
state axioms in ﬁrst-order logic have had less success in coming up with good heuristics.

Section 10.2.
Algorithms for Planning as State-Space Search
373
10.2
ALGORITHMS FOR PLANNING AS STATE-SPACE SEARCH
Now we turn our attention to planning algorithms. We saw how the description of a planning
problem deﬁnes a search problem: we can search from the initial state through the space
of states, looking for a goal. One of the nice advantages of the declarative representation of
action schemas is that we can also search backward from the goal, looking for the initial state.
Figure 10.5 compares forward and backward searches.
10.2.1
Forward (progression) state-space search
Now that we have shown how a planning problem maps into a search problem, we can solve
planning problems with any of the heuristic search algorithms from Chapter 3 or a local
search algorithm from Chapter 4 (provided we keep track of the actions used to reach the
goal). From the earliest days of planning research (around 1961) until around 1998 it was
assumed that forward state-space search was too inefﬁcient to be practical. It is not hard to
come up with reasons why.
First, forward search is prone to exploring irrelevant actions. Consider the noble task
of buying a copy of AI: A Modern Approach from an online bookseller. Suppose there is an
(a)
(b)
At(P1, A)
Fly(P1, A, B)
Fly(P2, A, B)
Fly(P1, A, B)
Fly(P2, A, B)
At(P2, A)
At(P1, B)
At(P2, A)
At(P1, A)
At(P2, B)
At(P1, B)
At(P2, B)
At(P1, B)
At(P2, A)
At(P1, A)
At(P2, B)
Figure 10.5
Two approaches to searching for a plan. (a) Forward (progression) search
through the space of states, starting in the initial state and using the problem’s actions to
search forward for a member of the set of goal states. (b) Backward (regression) search
through sets of relevant states, starting at the set of states representing the goal and using the
inverse of the actions to search backward for the initial state.

374
Chapter
10.
Classical Planning
action schema Buy(isbn) with effect Own(isbn). ISBNs are 10 digits, so this action schema
represents 10 billion ground actions. An uninformed forward-search algorithm would have
to start enumerating these 10 billion actions to ﬁnd one that leads to the goal.
Second, planning problems often have large state spaces. Consider an air cargo problem
with 10 airports, where each airport has 5 planes and 20 pieces of cargo. The goal is to move
all the cargo at airport A to airport B. There is a simple solution to the problem: load the 20
pieces of cargo into one of the planes at A, ﬂy the plane to B, and unload the cargo. Finding
the solution can be difﬁcult because the average branching factor is huge: each of the 50
planes can ﬂy to 9 other airports, and each of the 200 packages can be either unloaded (if
it is loaded) or loaded into any plane at its airport (if it is unloaded). So in any state there
is a minimum of 450 actions (when all the packages are at airports with no planes) and a
maximum of 10,450 (when all packages and planes are at the same airport). On average, let’s
say there are about 2000 possible actions per state, so the search graph up to the depth of the
obvious solution has about 200041 nodes.
Clearly, even this relatively small problem instance is hopeless without an accurate
heuristic. Although many real-world applications of planning have relied on domain-speciﬁc
heuristics, it turns out (as we see in Section 10.2.3) that strong domain-independent heuristics
can be derived automatically; that is what makes forward search feasible.
10.2.2
Backward (regression) relevant-states search
In regression search we start at the goal and apply the actions backward until we ﬁnd a
sequence of steps that reaches the initial state. It is called relevant-states search because we
RELEVANT-STATES
only consider actions that are relevant to the goal (or current state). As in belief-state search
(Section 4.4), there is a set of relevant states to consider at each step, not just a single state.
We start with the goal, which is a conjunction of literals forming a description of a set of
states—for example, the goal ¬Poor ∧Famous describes those states in which Poor is false,
Famous is true, and any other ﬂuent can have any value. If there are n ground ﬂuents in a
domain, then there are 2n ground states (each ﬂuent can be true or false), but 3n descriptions
of sets of goal states (each ﬂuent can be positive, negative, or not mentioned).
In general, backward search works only when we know how to regress from a state
description to the predecessor state description. For example, it is hard to search backwards
for a solution to the n-queens problem because there is no easy way to describe the states that
are one move away from the goal. Happily, the PDDL representation was designed to make
it easy to regress actions—if a domain can be expressed in PDDL, then we can do regression
search on it. Given a ground goal description g and a ground action a, the regression from g
over a gives us a state description g′ deﬁned by
g′ = (g −ADD(a)) ∪Precond(a) .
That is, the effects that were added by the action need not have been true before, and also
the preconditions must have held before, or else the action could not have been executed.
Note that DEL(a) does not appear in the formula; that’s because while we know the ﬂuents
in DEL(a) are no longer true after the action, we don’t know whether or not they were true
before, so there’s nothing to be said about them.

Section 10.2.
Algorithms for Planning as State-Space Search
375
To get the full advantage of backward search, we need to deal with partially uninstanti-
ated actions and states, not just ground ones. For example, suppose the goal is to deliver a spe-
ciﬁc piece of cargo to SFO: At(C2, SFO). That suggests the action Unload(C2, p′, SFO):
Action(Unload(C2, p′, SFO),
PRECOND:In(C2, p′) ∧At(p′, SFO) ∧Cargo(C2) ∧Plane(p′) ∧Airport(SFO)
EFFECT:At(C2, SFO) ∧¬In(C2, p′) .
(Note that we have standardized variable names (changing p to p′ in this case) so that there
will be no confusion between variable names if we happen to use the same action schema
twice in a plan. The same approach was used in Chapter 9 for ﬁrst-order logical inference.)
This represents unloading the package from an unspeciﬁed plane at SFO; any plane will do,
but we need not say which one now. We can take advantage of the power of ﬁrst-order
representations: a single description summarizes the possibility of using any of the planes by
implicitly quantifying over p′. The regressed state description is
g′ = In(C2, p′) ∧At(p′, SFO) ∧Cargo(C2) ∧Plane(p′) ∧Airport(SFO) .
The ﬁnal issue is deciding which actions are candidates to regress over. In the forward direc-
tion we chose actions that were applicable—those actions that could be the next step in the
plan. In backward search we want actions that are relevant—those actions that could be the
RELEVANCE
last step in a plan leading up to the current goal state.
For an action to be relevant to a goal it obviously must contribute to the goal: at least
one of the action’s effects (either positive or negative) must unify with an element of the goal.
What is less obvious is that the action must not have any effect (positive or negative) that
negates an element of the goal. Now, if the goal is A ∧B ∧C and an action has the effect
A∧B∧¬C then there is a colloquial sense in which that action is very relevant to the goal—it
gets us two-thirds of the way there. But it is not relevant in the technical sense deﬁned here,
because this action could not be the ﬁnal step of a solution—we would always need at least
one more step to achieve C.
Given the goal At(C2, SFO), several instantiations of Unload are relevant: we could
chose any speciﬁc plane to unload from, or we could leave the plane unspeciﬁed by using
the action Unload(C2, p′, SFO). We can reduce the branching factor without ruling out any
solutions by always using the action formed by substituting the most general uniﬁer into the
(standardized) action schema.
As another example, consider the goal Own(0136042597), given an initial state with
10 billion ISBNs, and the single action schema
A = Action(Buy(i), PRECOND:ISBN (i), EFFECT:Own(i)) .
As we mentioned before, forward search without a heuristic would have to start enumer-
ating the 10 billion ground Buy actions. But with backward search, we would unify the
goal Own(0136042597) with the (standardized) effect Own(i′), yielding the substitution
θ = {i′/0136042597}. Then we would regress over the action Subst(θ, A′) to yield the
predecessor state description ISBN (0136042597). This is part of, and thus entailed by, the
initial state, so we are done.

376
Chapter
10.
Classical Planning
We can make this more formal. Assume a goal description g which contains a goal
literal gi and an action schema A that is standardized to produce A′. If A′ has an effect literal
e′
j where Unify(gi, e′
j) = θ and where we deﬁne a′ = SUBST(θ, A′) and if there is no effect
in a′ that is the negation of a literal in g, then a′ is a relevant action towards g.
Backward search keeps the branching factor lower than forward search, for most prob-
lem domains. However, the fact that backward search uses state sets rather than individual
states makes it harder to come up with good heuristics. That is the main reason why the
majority of current systems favor forward search.
10.2.3
Heuristics for planning
Neither forward nor backward search is efﬁcient without a good heuristic function. Recall
from Chapter 3 that a heuristic function h(s) estimates the distance from a state s to the
goal and that if we can derive an admissible heuristic for this distance—one that does not
overestimate—then we can use A∗search to ﬁnd optimal solutions. An admissible heuristic
can be derived by deﬁning a relaxed problem that is easier to solve. The exact cost of a
solution to this easier problem then becomes the heuristic for the original problem.
By deﬁnition, there is no way to analyze an atomic state, and thus it it requires some
ingenuity by a human analyst to deﬁne good domain-speciﬁc heuristics for search problems
with atomic states. Planning uses a factored representation for states and action schemas.
That makes it possible to deﬁne good domain-independent heuristics and for programs to
automatically apply a good domain-independent heuristic for a given problem.
Think of a search problem as a graph where the nodes are states and the edges are
actions. The problem is to ﬁnd a path connecting the initial state to a goal state. There are
two ways we can relax this problem to make it easier: by adding more edges to the graph,
making it strictly easier to ﬁnd a path, or by grouping multiple nodes together, forming an
abstraction of the state space that has fewer states, and thus is easier to search.
We look ﬁrst at heuristics that add edges to the graph. For example, the ignore pre-
conditions heuristic drops all preconditions from actions. Every action becomes applicable
IGNORE
PRECONDITIONS
HEURISTIC
in every state, and any single goal ﬂuent can be achieved in one step (if there is an applica-
ble action—if not, the problem is impossible). This almost implies that the number of steps
required to solve the relaxed problem is the number of unsatisﬁed goals—almost but not
quite, because (1) some action may achieve multiple goals and (2) some actions may undo
the effects of others. For many problems an accurate heuristic is obtained by considering (1)
and ignoring (2). First, we relax the actions by removing all preconditions and all effects
except those that are literals in the goal. Then, we count the minimum number of actions
required such that the union of those actions’ effects satisﬁes the goal. This is an instance
of the set-cover problem. There is one minor irritation: the set-cover problem is NP-hard.
SET-COVER
PROBLEM
Fortunately a simple greedy algorithm is guaranteed to return a set covering whose size is
within a factor of log n of the true minimum covering, where n is the number of literals in
the goal. Unfortunately, the greedy algorithm loses the guarantee of admissibility.
It is also possible to ignore only selected preconditions of actions. Consider the sliding-
block puzzle (8-puzzle or 15-puzzle) from Section 3.2. We could encode this as a planning

Section 10.2.
Algorithms for Planning as State-Space Search
377
problem involving tiles with a single schema Slide:
Action(Slide(t, s1, s2),
PRECOND:On(t, s1) ∧Tile(t) ∧Blank(s2) ∧Adjacent(s1, s2)
EFFECT:On(t, s2) ∧Blank(s1) ∧¬On(t, s1) ∧¬Blank(s2))
As we saw in Section 3.6, if we remove the preconditions Blank(s2) ∧Adjacent(s1, s2)
then any tile can move in one action to any space and we get the number-of-misplaced-tiles
heuristic. If we remove Blank(s2) then we get the Manhattan-distance heuristic. It is easy to
see how these heuristics could be derived automatically from the action schema description.
The ease of manipulating the schemas is the great advantage of the factored representation of
planning problems, as compared with the atomic representation of search problems.
Another possibility is the ignore delete lists heuristic. Assume for a moment that all
IGNORE DELETE
LISTS
goals and preconditions contain only positive literals3 We want to create a relaxed version of
the original problem that will be easier to solve, and where the length of the solution will serve
as a good heuristic. We can do that by removing the delete lists from all actions (i.e., removing
all negative literals from effects). That makes it possible to make monotonic progress towards
the goal—no action will ever undo progress made by another action. It turns out it is still NP-
hard to ﬁnd the optimal solution to this relaxed problem, but an approximate solution can be
found in polynomial time by hill-climbing. Figure 10.6 diagrams part of the state space for
two planning problems using the ignore-delete-lists heuristic. The dots represent states and
the edges actions, and the height of each dot above the bottom plane represents the heuristic
value. States on the bottom plane are solutions. In both these problems, there is a wide path
to the goal. There are no dead ends, so no need for backtracking; a simple hillclimbing search
will easily ﬁnd a solution to these problems (although it may not be an optimal solution).
The relaxed problems leave us with a simpliﬁed—but still expensive—planning prob-
lem just to calculate the value of the heuristic function. Many planning problems have 10100
states or more, and relaxing the actions does nothing to reduce the number of states. There-
fore, we now look at relaxations that decrease the number of states by forming a state ab-
straction—a many-to-one mapping from states in the ground representation of the problem
STATE ABSTRACTION
to the abstract representation.
The easiest form of state abstraction is to ignore some ﬂuents. For example, consider
an air cargo problem with 10 airports, 50 planes, and 200 pieces of cargo. Each plane can
be at one of 10 airports and each package can be either in one of the planes or unloaded at
one of the airports. So there are 5010 × 20050+10 ≈10155 states. Now consider a particular
problem in that domain in which it happens that all the packages are at just 5 of the airports,
and all packages at a given airport have the same destination. Then a useful abstraction of the
problem is to drop all the At ﬂuents except for the ones involving one plane and one package
at each of the 5 airports. Now there are only 510 × 55+10 ≈1017 states. A solution in this
abstract state space will be shorter than a solution in the original space (and thus will be an
admissible heuristic), and the abstract solution is easy to extend to a solution to the original
problem (by adding additional Load and Unload actions).
3 Many problems are written with this convention. For problems that aren’t, replace every negative literal ¬P
in a goal or precondition with a new positive literal, P ′.

378
Chapter
10.
Classical Planning
Figure 10.6
Two state spaces from planning problems with the ignore-delete-lists heuris-
tic. The height above the bottom plane is the heuristic score of a state; states on the bottom
plane are goals. There are no local minima, so search for the goal is straightforward. From
Hoffmann (2005).
A key idea in deﬁning heuristics is decomposition: dividing a problem into parts, solv-
DECOMPOSITION
ing each part independently, and then combining the parts. The subgoal independence as-
SUBGOAL
INDEPENDENCE
sumption is that the cost of solving a conjunction of subgoals is approximated by the sum
of the costs of solving each subgoal independently. The subgoal independence assumption
can be optimistic or pessimistic. It is optimistic when there are negative interactions between
the subplans for each subgoal—for example, when an action in one subplan deletes a goal
achieved by another subplan. It is pessimistic, and therefore inadmissible, when subplans
contain redundant actions—for instance, two actions that could be replaced by a single action
in the merged plan.
Suppose the goal is a set of ﬂuents G, which we divide into disjoint subsets G1, . . . , Gn.
We then ﬁnd plans P1, . . . , Pn that solve the respective subgoals. What is an estimate of the
cost of the plan for achieving all of G? We can think of each Cost(Pi) as a heuristic estimate,
and we know that if we combine estimates by taking their maximum value, we always get an
admissible heuristic. So maxi COST(Pi) is admissible, and sometimes it is exactly correct:
it could be that P1 serendipitously achieves all the Gi. But in most cases, in practice the
estimate is too low. Could we sum the costs instead? For many problems that is a reasonable
estimate, but it is not admissible. The best case is when we can determine that Gi and Gj are
independent. If the effects of Pi leave all the preconditions and goals of Pj unchanged, then
the estimate COST(Pi) + COST(Pj) is admissible, and more accurate than the max estimate.
We show in Section 10.3.1 that planning graphs can help provide better heuristic estimates.
It is clear that there is great potential for cutting down the search space by forming ab-
stractions. The trick is choosing the right abstractions and using them in a way that makes
the total cost—deﬁning an abstraction, doing an abstract search, and mapping the abstraction
back to the original problem—less than the cost of solving the original problem. The tech-

Section 10.3.
Planning Graphs
379
niques of pattern databases from Section 3.6.3 can be useful, because the cost of creating
the pattern database can be amortized over multiple problem instances.
An example of a system that makes use of effective heuristics is FF, or FASTFORWARD
(Hoffmann, 2005), a forward state-space searcher that uses the ignore-delete-lists heuristic,
estimating the heuristic with the help of a planning graph (see Section 10.3). FF then uses
hill-climbing search (modiﬁed to keep track of the plan) with the heuristic to ﬁnd a solution.
When it hits a plateau or local maximum—when no action leads to a state with better heuristic
score—then FF uses iterative deepening search until it ﬁnds a state that is better, or it gives
up and restarts hill-climbing.
10.3
PLANNING GRAPHS
All of the heuristics we have suggested can suffer from inaccuracies. This section shows
how a special data structure called a planning graph can be used to give better heuristic
PLANNING GRAPH
estimates. These heuristics can be applied to any of the search techniques we have seen so
far. Alternatively, we can search for a solution over the space formed by the planning graph,
using an algorithm called GRAPHPLAN.
A planning problem asks if we can reach a goal state from the initial state. Suppose we
are given a tree of all possible actions from the initial state to successor states, and their suc-
cessors, and so on. If we indexed this tree appropriately, we could answer the planning ques-
tion “can we reach state G from state S0” immediately, just by looking it up. Of course, the
tree is of exponential size, so this approach is impractical. A planning graph is polynomial-
size approximation to this tree that can be constructed quickly. The planning graph can’t
answer deﬁnitively whether G is reachable from S0, but it can estimate how many steps it
takes to reach G. The estimate is always correct when it reports the goal is not reachable, and
it never overestimates the number of steps, so it is an admissible heuristic.
A planning graph is a directed graph organized into levels: ﬁrst a level S0 for the initial
LEVEL
state, consisting of nodes representing each ﬂuent that holds in S0; then a level A0 consisting
of nodes for each ground action that might be applicable in S0; then alternating levels Si
followed by Ai; until we reach a termination condition (to be discussed later).
Roughly speaking, Si contains all the literals that could hold at time i, depending on
the actions executed at preceding time steps. If it is possible that either P or ¬P could hold,
then both will be represented in Si. Also roughly speaking, Ai contains all the actions that
could have their preconditions satisﬁed at time i. We say “roughly speaking” because the
planning graph records only a restricted subset of the possible negative interactions among
actions; therefore, a literal might show up at level Sj when actually it could not be true until
a later level, if at all. (A literal will never show up too late.) Despite the possible error, the
level j at which a literal ﬁrst appears is a good estimate of how difﬁcult it is to achieve the
literal from the initial state.
Planning graphs work only for propositional planning problems—ones with no vari-
ables. As we mentioned on page 368, it is straightforward to propositionalize a set of ac-

380
Chapter
10.
Classical Planning
Init(Have(Cake))
Goal(Have(Cake) ∧Eaten(Cake))
Action(Eat(Cake)
PRECOND: Have(Cake)
EFFECT: ¬ Have(Cake) ∧Eaten(Cake))
Action(Bake(Cake)
PRECOND: ¬ Have(Cake)
EFFECT: Have(Cake))
Figure 10.7
The “have cake and eat cake too” problem.
Bake(Cake)
Eat(Cake)
Have(Cake)
S0
A0
S1
A1
S2
Have(Cake)
Have(Cake)
Have(Cake)
Have(Cake)
Eaten(Cake)
Eaten(Cake)
Eaten(Cake)
Eaten(Cake)
Eaten(Cake)
Eat(Cake)
¬
¬
¬
¬
¬
Figure 10.8
The planning graph for the “have cake and eat cake too” problem up to level
S2. Rectangles indicate actions (small squares indicate persistence actions), and straight
lines indicate preconditions and effects. Mutex links are shown as curved gray lines. Not all
mutex links are shown, because the graph would be too cluttered. In general, if two literals
are mutex at Si, then the persistence actions for those literals will be mutex at Ai and we
need not draw that mutex link.
tion schemas. Despite the resulting increase in the size of the problem description, planning
graphs have proved to be effective tools for solving hard planning problems.
Figure 10.7 shows a simple planning problem, and Figure 10.8 shows its planning
graph. Each action at level Ai is connected to its preconditions at Si and its effects at Si+1.
So a literal appears because an action caused it, but we also want to say that a literal can
persist if no action negates it. This is represented by a persistence action (sometimes called
PERSISTENCE
ACTION
a no-op). For every literal C, we add to the problem a persistence action with precondition C
and effect C. Level A0 in Figure 10.8 shows one “real” action, Eat(Cake), along with two
persistence actions drawn as small square boxes.
Level A0 contains all the actions that could occur in state S0, but just as important it
records conﬂicts between actions that would prevent them from occurring together. The gray
lines in Figure 10.8 indicate mutual exclusion (or mutex) links. For example, Eat(Cake) is
MUTUAL EXCLUSION
MUTEX
mutually exclusive with the persistence of either Have(Cake) or ¬Eaten(Cake). We shall
see shortly how mutex links are computed.
Level S1 contains all the literals that could result from picking any subset of the actions
in A0, as well as mutex links (gray lines) indicating literals that could not appear together,
regardless of the choice of actions. For example, Have(Cake) and Eaten(Cake) are mutex:

Section 10.3.
Planning Graphs
381
depending on the choice of actions in A0, either, but not both, could be the result. In other
words, S1 represents a belief state: a set of possible states. The members of this set are all
subsets of the literals such that there is no mutex link between any members of the subset.
We continue in this way, alternating between state level Si and action level Ai until we
reach a point where two consecutive levels are identical. At this point, we say that the graph
has leveled off. The graph in Figure 10.8 levels off at S2.
LEVELED OFF
What we end up with is a structure where every Ai level contains all the actions that are
applicable in Si, along with constraints saying that two actions cannot both be executed at the
same level. Every Si level contains all the literals that could result from any possible choice
of actions in Ai−1, along with constraints saying which pairs of literals are not possible.
It is important to note that the process of constructing the planning graph does not require
choosing among actions, which would entail combinatorial search. Instead, it just records the
impossibility of certain choices using mutex links.
We now deﬁne mutex links for both actions and literals. A mutex relation holds between
two actions at a given level if any of the following three conditions holds:
• Inconsistent effects: one action negates an effect of the other. For example, Eat(Cake)
and the persistence of Have(Cake) have inconsistent effects because they disagree on
the effect Have(Cake).
• Interference: one of the effects of one action is the negation of a precondition of the
other. For example Eat(Cake) interferes with the persistence of Have(Cake) by negat-
ing its precondition.
• Competing needs: one of the preconditions of one action is mutually exclusive with a
precondition of the other. For example, Bake(Cake) and Eat(Cake) are mutex because
they compete on the value of the Have(Cake) precondition.
A mutex relation holds between two literals at the same level if one is the negation of the other
or if each possible pair of actions that could achieve the two literals is mutually exclusive.
This condition is called inconsistent support. For example, Have(Cake) and Eaten(Cake)
are mutex in S1 because the only way of achieving Have(Cake), the persistence action, is
mutex with the only way of achieving Eaten(Cake), namely Eat(Cake). In S2 the two
literals are not mutex, because there are new ways of achieving them, such as Bake(Cake)
and the persistence of Eaten(Cake), that are not mutex.
A planning graph is polynomial in the size of the planning problem. For a planning
problem with l literals and a actions, each Si has no more than l nodes and l2 mutex links,
and each Ai has no more than a + l nodes (including the no-ops), (a + l)2 mutex links, and
2(al + l) precondition and effect links. Thus, an entire graph with n levels has a size of
O(n(a + l)2). The time to build the graph has the same complexity.
10.3.1
Planning graphs for heuristic estimation
A planning graph, once constructed, is a rich source of information about the problem. First,
if any goal literal fails to appear in the ﬁnal level of the graph, then the problem is unsolvable.
Second, we can estimate the cost of achieving any goal literal gi from state s as the level at
which gi ﬁrst appears in the planning graph constructed from initial state s. We call this the

382
Chapter
10.
Classical Planning
level cost of gi. In Figure 10.8, Have(Cake) has level cost 0 and Eaten(Cake) has level cost
LEVEL COST
1. It is easy to show (Exercise 10.10) that these estimates are admissible for the individual
goals. The estimate might not always be accurate, however, because planning graphs allow
several actions at each level, whereas the heuristic counts just the level and not the number
of actions. For this reason, it is common to use a serial planning graph for computing
SERIAL PLANNING
GRAPH
heuristics. A serial graph insists that only one action can actually occur at any given time
step; this is done by adding mutex links between every pair of nonpersistence actions. Level
costs extracted from serial graphs are often quite reasonable estimates of actual costs.
To estimate the cost of a conjunction of goals, there are three simple approaches. The
max-level heuristic simply takes the maximum level cost of any of the goals; this is admissi-
MAX-LEVEL
ble, but not necessarily accurate.
The level sum heuristic, following the subgoal independence assumption, returns the
LEVEL SUM
sum of the level costs of the goals; this can be inadmissible but works well in practice
for problems that are largely decomposable. It is much more accurate than the number-
of-unsatisﬁed-goals heuristic from Section 10.2. For our problem, the level-sum heuristic
estimate for the conjunctive goal Have(Cake) ∧Eaten(Cake) will be 0 + 1 = 1, whereas
the correct answer is 2, achieved by the plan [Eat(Cake), Bake(Cake)]. That doesn’t seem
so bad. A more serious error is that if Bake(Cake) were not in the set of actions, then the
estimate would still be 1, when in fact the conjunctive goal would be impossible.
Finally, the set-level heuristic ﬁnds the level at which all the literals in the conjunctive
SET-LEVEL
goal appear in the planning graph without any pair of them being mutually exclusive. This
heuristic gives the correct values of 2 for our original problem and inﬁnity for the problem
without Bake(Cake). It is admissible, it dominates the max-level heuristic, and it works
extremely well on tasks in which there is a good deal of interaction among subplans. It is not
perfect, of course; for example, it ignores interactions among three or more literals.
As a tool for generating accurate heuristics, we can view the planning graph as a relaxed
problem that is efﬁciently solvable. To understand the nature of the relaxed problem, we
need to understand exactly what it means for a literal g to appear at level Si in the planning
graph. Ideally, we would like it to be a guarantee that there exists a plan with i action levels
that achieves g, and also that if g does not appear, there is no such plan. Unfortunately,
making that guarantee is as difﬁcult as solving the original planning problem. So the planning
graph makes the second half of the guarantee (if g does not appear, there is no plan), but
if g does appear, then all the planning graph promises is that there is a plan that possibly
achieves g and has no “obvious” ﬂaws. An obvious ﬂaw is deﬁned as a ﬂaw that can be
detected by considering two actions or two literals at a time—in other words, by looking at
the mutex relations. There could be more subtle ﬂaws involving three, four, or more actions,
but experience has shown that it is not worth the computational effort to keep track of these
possible ﬂaws. This is similar to a lesson learned from constraint satisfaction problems—that
it is often worthwhile to compute 2-consistency before searching for a solution, but less often
worthwhile to compute 3-consistency or higher. (See page 211.)
One example of an unsolvable problem that cannot be recognized as such by a planning
graph is the blocks-world problem where the goal is to get block A on B, B on C, and C on
A. This is an impossible goal; a tower with the bottom on top of the top. But a planning graph

Section 10.3.
Planning Graphs
383
cannot detect the impossibility, because any two of the three subgoals are achievable. There
are no mutexes between any pair of literals, only between the three as a whole. To detect that
this problem is impossible, we would have to search over the planning graph.
10.3.2
The GRAPHPLAN algorithm
This subsection shows how to extract a plan directly from the planning graph, rather than just
using the graph to provide a heuristic. The GRAPHPLAN algorithm (Figure 10.9) repeatedly
adds a level to a planning graph with EXPAND-GRAPH. Once all the goals show up as non-
mutex in the graph, GRAPHPLAN calls EXTRACT-SOLUTION to search for a plan that solves
the problem. If that fails, it expands another level and tries again, terminating with failure
when there is no reason to go on.
function GRAPHPLAN(problem) returns solution or failure
graph ←INITIAL-PLANNING-GRAPH(problem)
goals ←CONJUNCTS(problem.GOAL)
nogoods ←an empty hash table
for tl = 0 to ∞do
if goals all non-mutex in St of graph then
solution ←EXTRACT-SOLUTION(graph, goals, NUMLEVELS(graph), nogoods)
if solution̸ = failure then return solution
if graph and nogoods have both leveled off then return failure
graph ←EXPAND-GRAPH(graph, problem)
Figure 10.9
The GRAPHPLAN algorithm. GRAPHPLAN calls EXPAND-GRAPH to add a
level until either a solution is found by EXTRACT-SOLUTION, or no solution is possible.
Let us now trace the operation of GRAPHPLAN on the spare tire problem from page 370.
The graph is shown in Figure 10.10. The ﬁrst line of GRAPHPLAN initializes the planning
graph to a one-level (S0) graph representing the initial state. The positive ﬂuents from the
problem description’s initial state are shown, as are the relevant negative ﬂuents. Not shown
are the unchanging positive literals (such as Tire(Spare)) and the irrelevant negative literals.
The goal At(Spare, Axle) is not present in S0, so we need not call EXTRACT-SOLUTION—
we are certain that there is no solution yet. Instead, EXPAND-GRAPH adds into A0 the three
actions whose preconditions exist at level S0 (i.e., all the actions except PutOn(Spare, Axle)),
along with persistence actions for all the literals in S0. The effects of the actions are added at
level S1. EXPAND-GRAPH then looks for mutex relations and adds them to the graph.
At(Spare, Axle) is still not present in S1, so again we do not call EXTRACT-SOLUTION.
We call EXPAND-GRAPH again, adding A1 and S1 and giving us the planning graph shown
in Figure 10.10. Now that we have the full complement of actions, it is worthwhile to look at
some of the examples of mutex relations and their causes:
• Inconsistent effects: Remove(Spare, Trunk) is mutex with LeaveOvernight because
one has the effect At(Spare, Ground) and the other has its negation.

384
Chapter
10.
Classical Planning
S0
A1
S2
At(Spare,Trunk)
At(Spare,Trunk)
At(Flat,Axle)
At(Flat,Axle)
At(Spare,Axle)
At(Flat,Ground)
At(Flat,Ground)
At(Spare,Ground)
At(Spare,Ground)
At(Spare,Trunk)
At(Spare,Trunk)
At(Flat,Axle)
At(Flat,Axle)
At(Spare,Axle)
At(Flat,Ground)
At(Flat,Ground)
At(Spare,Ground)
At(Spare,Ground)
At(Spare,Axle)
At(Spare,Trunk)
At(Flat,Axle)
At(Spare,Axle)
At(Flat,Ground)
At(Spare,Ground)
PutOn(Spare,Axle)
LeaveOvernight
Remove(Flat,Axle)
Remove(Spare,Trunk)
Remove(Spare,Trunk)
Remove(Flat,Axle)
LeaveOvernight
¬
¬
¬
¬
¬
¬
¬
¬
¬
¬
¬
¬
¬
A0
S1
Figure 10.10
The planning graph for the spare tire problem after expansion to level S2.
Mutex links are shown as gray lines. Not all links are shown, because the graph would be too
cluttered if we showed them all. The solution is indicated by bold lines and outlines.
• Interference: Remove(Flat, Axle) is mutex with LeaveOvernight because one has the
precondition At(Flat, Axle) and the other has its negation as an effect.
• Competing needs: PutOn(Spare, Axle) is mutex with Remove(Flat, Axle) because
one has At(Flat, Axle) as a precondition and the other has its negation.
• Inconsistent support: At(Spare, Axle) is mutex with At(Flat, Axle) in S2 because the
only way of achieving At(Spare, Axle) is by PutOn(Spare, Axle), and that is mutex
with the persistence action that is the only way of achieving At(Flat, Axle). Thus, the
mutex relations detect the immediate conﬂict that arises from trying to put two objects
in the same place at the same time.
This time, when we go back to the start of the loop, all the literals from the goal are present
in S2, and none of them is mutex with any other. That means that a solution might exist,
and EXTRACT-SOLUTION will try to ﬁnd it. We can formulate EXTRACT-SOLUTION as a
Boolean constraint satisfaction problem (CSP) where the variables are the actions at each
level, the values for each variable are in or out of the plan, and the constraints are the mutexes
and the need to satisfy each goal and precondition.
Alternatively, we can deﬁne EXTRACT-SOLUTION as a backward search problem, where
each state in the search contains a pointer to a level in the planning graph and a set of unsat-
isﬁed goals. We deﬁne this search problem as follows:
• The initial state is the last level of the planning graph, Sn, along with the set of goals
from the planning problem.
• The actions available in a state at level Si are to select any conﬂict-free subset of the
actions in Ai−1 whose effects cover the goals in the state. The resulting state has level
Si−1 and has as its set of goals the preconditions for the selected set of actions. By
“conﬂict free,” we mean a set of actions such that no two of them are mutex and no two
of their preconditions are mutex.

Section 10.3.
Planning Graphs
385
• The goal is to reach a state at level S0 such that all the goals are satisﬁed.
• The cost of each action is 1.
For this particular problem, we start at S2 with the goal At(Spare, Axle). The only choice we
have for achieving the goal set is PutOn(Spare, Axle). That brings us to a search state at S1
with goals At(Spare, Ground) and ¬At(Flat, Axle). The former can be achieved only by
Remove(Spare, Trunk), and the latter by either Remove(Flat, Axle) or LeaveOvernight.
But LeaveOvernight is mutex with Remove(Spare, Trunk), so the only solution is to choose
Remove(Spare, Trunk) and Remove(Flat, Axle). That brings us to a search state at S0 with
the goals At(Spare, Trunk) and At(Flat, Axle). Both of these are present in the state, so
we have a solution: the actions Remove(Spare, Trunk) and Remove(Flat, Axle) in level
A0, followed by PutOn(Spare, Axle) in A1.
In the case where EXTRACT-SOLUTION fails to ﬁnd a solution for a set of goals at
a given level, we record the (level, goals) pair as a no-good, just as we did in constraint
learning for CSPs (page 220). Whenever EXTRACT-SOLUTION is called again with the same
level and goals, we can ﬁnd the recorded no-good and immediately return failure rather than
searching again. We see shortly that no-goods are also used in the termination test.
We know that planning is PSPACE-complete and that constructing the planning graph
takes polynomial time, so it must be the case that solution extraction is intractable in the worst
case. Therefore, we will need some heuristic guidance for choosing among actions during the
backward search. One approach that works well in practice is a greedy algorithm based on
the level cost of the literals. For any set of goals, we proceed in the following order:
1. Pick ﬁrst the literal with the highest level cost.
2. To achieve that literal, prefer actions with easier preconditions. That is, choose an action
such that the sum (or maximum) of the level costs of its preconditions is smallest.
10.3.3
Termination of GRAPHPLAN
So far, we have skated over the question of termination. Here we show that GRAPHPLAN will
in fact terminate and return failure when there is no solution.
The ﬁrst thing to understand is why we can’t stop expanding the graph as soon as it has
leveled off. Consider an air cargo domain with one plane and n pieces of cargo at airport
A, all of which have airport B as their destination. In this version of the problem, only one
piece of cargo can ﬁt in the plane at a time. The graph will level off at level 4, reﬂecting the
fact that for any single piece of cargo, we can load it, ﬂy it, and unload it at the destination in
three steps. But that does not mean that a solution can be extracted from the graph at level 4;
in fact a solution will require 4n −1 steps: for each piece of cargo we load, ﬂy, and unload,
and for all but the last piece we need to ﬂy back to airport A to get the next piece.
How long do we have to keep expanding after the graph has leveled off? If the function
EXTRACT-SOLUTION fails to ﬁnd a solution, then there must have been at least one set of
goals that were not achievable and were marked as a no-good. So if it is possible that there
might be fewer no-goods in the next level, then we should continue. As soon as the graph
itself and the no-goods have both leveled off, with no solution found, we can terminate with
failure because there is no possibility of a subsequent change that could add a solution.

386
Chapter
10.
Classical Planning
Now all we have to do is prove that the graph and the no-goods will always level off. The
key to this proof is that certain properties of planning graphs are monotonically increasing or
decreasing. “X increases monotonically” means that the set of Xs at level i + 1 is a superset
(not necessarily proper) of the set at level i. The properties are as follows:
• Literals increase monotonically: Once a literal appears at a given level, it will appear
at all subsequent levels. This is because of the persistence actions; once a literal shows
up, persistence actions cause it to stay forever.
• Actions increase monotonically: Once an action appears at a given level, it will appear
at all subsequent levels. This is a consequence of the monotonic increase of literals; if
the preconditions of an action appear at one level, they will appear at subsequent levels,
and thus so will the action.
• Mutexes decrease monotonically: If two actions are mutex at a given level Ai, then they
will also be mutex for all previous levels at which they both appear. The same holds for
mutexes between literals. It might not always appear that way in the ﬁgures, because
the ﬁgures have a simpliﬁcation: they display neither literals that cannot hold at level
Si nor actions that cannot be executed at level Ai. We can see that “mutexes decrease
monotonically” is true if you consider that these invisible literals and actions are mutex
with everything.
The proof can be handled by cases: if actions A and B are mutex at level Ai, it
must be because of one of the three types of mutex. The ﬁrst two, inconsistent effects
and interference, are properties of the actions themselves, so if the actions are mutex
at Ai, they will be mutex at every level. The third case, competing needs, depends on
conditions at level Si: that level must contain a precondition of A that is mutex with
a precondition of B. Now, these two preconditions can be mutex if they are negations
of each other (in which case they would be mutex in every level) or if all actions for
achieving one are mutex with all actions for achieving the other. But we already know
that the available actions are increasing monotonically, so, by induction, the mutexes
must be decreasing.
• No-goods decrease monotonically: If a set of goals is not achievable at a given level,
then they are not achievable in any previous level. The proof is by contradiction: if they
were achievable at some previous level, then we could just add persistence actions to
make them achievable at a subsequent level.
Because the actions and literals increase monotonically and because there are only a ﬁnite
number of actions and literals, there must come a level that has the same number of actions
and literals as the previous level. Because mutexes and no-goods decrease, and because there
can never be fewer than zero mutexes or no-goods, there must come a level that has the
same number of mutexes and no-goods as the previous level. Once a graph has reached this
state, then if one of the goals is missing or is mutex with another goal, then we can stop the
GRAPHPLAN algorithm and return failure. That concludes a sketch of the proof; for more
details see Ghallab et al. (2004).

Section 10.4.
Other Classical Planning Approaches
387
Year
Track
Winning Systems (approaches)
2008
Optimal
GAMER (model checking, bidirectional search)
2008
Satisﬁcing
LAMA (fast downward search with FF heuristic)
2006
Optimal
SATPLAN, MAXPLAN (Boolean satisﬁability)
2006
Satisﬁcing
SGPLAN (forward search; partitions into independent subproblems)
2004
Optimal
SATPLAN (Boolean satisﬁability)
2004
Satisﬁcing
FAST DIAGONALLY DOWNWARD (forward search with causal graph)
2002
Automated
LPG (local search, planning graphs converted to CSPs)
2002
Hand-coded
TLPLAN (temporal action logic with control rules for forward search)
2000
Automated
FF (forward search)
2000
Hand-coded
TALPLANNER (temporal action logic with control rules for forward search)
1998
Automated
IPP (planning graphs); HSP (forward search)
Figure 10.11
Some of the top-performing systems in the International Planning Compe-
tition. Each year there are various tracks: “Optimal” means the planners must produce the
shortest possible plan, while “Satisﬁcing” means nonoptimal solutions are accepted. “Hand-
coded” means domain-speciﬁc heuristics are allowed; “Automated” means they are not.
10.4
OTHER CLASSICAL PLANNING APPROACHES
Currently the most popular and effective approaches to fully automated planning are:
• Translating to a Boolean satisﬁability (SAT) problem
• Forward state-space search with carefully crafted heuristics (Section 10.2)
• Search using a planning graph (Section 10.3)
These three approaches are not the only ones tried in the 40-year history of automated plan-
ning. Figure 10.11 shows some of the top systems in the International Planning Competitions,
which have been held every even year since 1998. In this section we ﬁrst describe the transla-
tion to a satisﬁability problem and then describe three other inﬂuential approaches: planning
as ﬁrst-order logical deduction; as constraint satisfaction; and as plan reﬁnement.
10.4.1
Classical planning as Boolean satisﬁability
In Section 7.7.4 we saw how SATPLAN solves planning problems that are expressed in propo-
sitional logic. Here we show how to translate a PDDL description into a form that can be
processed by SATPLAN. The translation is a series of straightforward steps:
• Propositionalize the actions: replace each action schema with a set of ground actions
formed by substituting constants for each of the variables. These ground actions are not
part of the translation, but will be used in subsequent steps.
• Deﬁne the initial state: assert F 0 for every ﬂuent F in the problem’s initial state, and
¬F for every ﬂuent not mentioned in the initial state.
• Propositionalize the goal: for every variable in the goal, replace the literals that contain
the variable with a disjunction over constants. For example, the goal of having block A
