8
FIRST-ORDER LOGIC
In which we notice that the world is blessed with many objects, some of which are
related to other objects, and in which we endeavor to reason about them.
In Chapter 7, we showed how a knowledge-based agent could represent the world in which it
operates and deduce what actions to take. We used propositional logic as our representation
language because it sufﬁced to illustrate the basic concepts of logic and knowledge-based
agents. Unfortunately, propositional logic is too puny a language to represent knowledge
of complex environments in a concise way. In this chapter, we examine ﬁrst-order logic,1
FIRST-ORDER LOGIC
which is sufﬁciently expressive to represent a good deal of our commonsense knowledge.
It also either subsumes or forms the foundation of many other representation languages and
has been studied intensively for many decades. We begin in Section 8.1 with a discussion of
representation languages in general; Section 8.2 covers the syntax and semantics of ﬁrst-order
logic; Sections 8.3 and 8.4 illustrate the use of ﬁrst-order logic for simple representations.
8.1
REPRESENTATION REVISITED
In this section, we discuss the nature of representation languages. Our discussion motivates
the development of ﬁrst-order logic, a much more expressive language than the propositional
logic introduced in Chapter 7. We look at propositional logic and at other kinds of languages
to understand what works and what fails. Our discussion will be cursory, compressing cen-
turies of thought, trial, and error into a few paragraphs.
Programming languages (such as C++ or Java or Lisp) are by far the largest class of
formal languages in common use. Programs themselves represent, in a direct sense, only
computational processes. Data structures within programs can represent facts; for example,
a program could use a 4 × 4 array to represent the contents of the wumpus world. Thus, the
programming language statement World[2,2] ←Pit is a fairly natural way to assert that there
is a pit in square [2,2]. (Such representations might be considered ad hoc; database systems
were developed precisely to provide a more general, domain-independent way to store and
1 Also called ﬁrst-order predicate calculus, sometimes abbreviated as FOL or FOPC.
285
MODULE 4

286
Chapter
8.
First-Order Logic
retrieve facts.) What programming languages lack is any general mechanism for deriving
facts from other facts; each update to a data structure is done by a domain-speciﬁc procedure
whose details are derived by the programmer from his or her own knowledge of the domain.
This procedural approach can be contrasted with the declarative nature of propositional logic,
in which knowledge and inference are separate, and inference is entirely domain independent.
A second drawback of data structures in programs (and of databases, for that matter)
is the lack of any easy way to say, for example, “There is a pit in [2,2] or [3,1]” or “If the
wumpus is in [1,1] then he is not in [2,2].” Programs can store a single value for each variable,
and some systems allow the value to be “unknown,” but they lack the expressiveness required
to handle partial information.
Propositional logic is a declarative language because its semantics is based on a truth
relation between sentences and possible worlds. It also has sufﬁcient expressive power to
deal with partial information, using disjunction and negation. Propositional logic has a third
property that is desirable in representation languages, namely, compositionality. In a com-
COMPOSITIONALITY
positional language, the meaning of a sentence is a function of the meaning of its parts. For
example, the meaning of “S1,4 ∧S1,2” is related to the meanings of “S1,4” and “S1,2.” It
would be very strange if “S1,4” meant that there is a stench in square [1,4] and “S1,2” meant
that there is a stench in square [1,2], but “S1,4 ∧S1,2” meant that France and Poland drew 1–1
in last week’s ice hockey qualifying match. Clearly, noncompositionality makes life much
more difﬁcult for the reasoning system.
As we saw in Chapter 7, however, propositional logic lacks the expressive power to
concisely describe an environment with many objects. For example, we were forced to write
a separate rule about breezes and pits for each square, such as
B1,1 ⇔(P1,2 ∨P2,1) .
In English, on the other hand, it seems easy enough to say, once and for all, “Squares adjacent
to pits are breezy.” The syntax and semantics of English somehow make it possible to describe
the environment concisely.
8.1.1
The language of thought
Natural languages (such as English or Spanish) are very expressive indeed. We managed to
write almost this whole book in natural language, with only occasional lapses into other lan-
guages (including logic, mathematics, and the language of diagrams). There is a long tradi-
tion in linguistics and the philosophy of language that views natural language as a declarative
knowledge representation language. If we could uncover the rules for natural language, we
could use it in representation and reasoning systems and gain the beneﬁt of the billions of
pages that have been written in natural language.
The modern view of natural language is that it serves a as a medium for communication
rather than pure representation. When a speaker points and says, “Look!” the listener comes
to know that, say, Superman has ﬁnally appeared over the rooftops. Yet we would not want
to say that the sentence “Look!” represents that fact. Rather, the meaning of the sentence
depends both on the sentence itself and on the context in which the sentence was spoken.
Clearly, one could not store a sentence such as “Look!” in a knowledge base and expect to

Section 8.1.
Representation Revisited
287
recover its meaning without also storing a representation of the context—which raises the
question of how the context itself can be represented. Natural languages also suffer from
ambiguity, a problem for a representation language. As Pinker (1995) puts it: “When people
AMBIGUITY
think about spring, surely they are not confused as to whether they are thinking about a season
or something that goes boing—and if one word can correspond to two thoughts, thoughts
can’t be words.”
The famous Sapir–Whorf hypothesis claims that our understanding of the world is
strongly inﬂuenced by the language we speak. Whorf (1956) wrote “We cut nature up, orga-
nize it into concepts, and ascribe signiﬁcances as we do, largely because we are parties to an
agreement to organize it this way—an agreement that holds throughout our speech commu-
nity and is codiﬁed in the patterns of our language.” It is certainly true that different speech
communities divide up the world differently. The French have two words “chaise” and “fau-
teuil,” for a concept that English speakers cover with one: “chair.” But English speakers
can easily recognize the category fauteuil and give it a name—roughly “open-arm chair”—so
does language really make a difference? Whorf relied mainly on intuition and speculation,
but in the intervening years we actually have real data from anthropological, psychological
and neurological studies.
For example, can you remember which of the following two phrases formed the opening
of Section 8.1?
“In this section, we discuss the nature of representation languages . . .”
“This section covers the topic of knowledge representation languages . . .”
Wanner (1974) did a similar experiment and found that subjects made the right choice at
chance level—about 50% of the time—but remembered the content of what they read with
better than 90% accuracy. This suggests that people process the words to form some kind of
nonverbal representation.
More interesting is the case in which a concept is completely absent in a language.
Speakers of the Australian aboriginal language Guugu Yimithirr have no words for relative
directions, such as front, back, right, or left. Instead they use absolute directions, saying,
for example, the equivalent of “I have a pain in my north arm.” This difference in language
makes a difference in behavior: Guugu Yimithirr speakers are better at navigating in open
terrain, while English speakers are better at placing the fork to the right of the plate.
Language also seems to inﬂuence thought through seemingly arbitrary grammatical
features such as the gender of nouns. For example, “bridge” is masculine in Spanish and
feminine in German. Boroditsky (2003) asked subjects to choose English adjectives to de-
scribe a photograph of a particular bridge. Spanish speakers chose big, dangerous, strong,
and towering, whereas German speakers chose beautiful, elegant, fragile, and slender. Words
can serve as anchor points that affect how we perceive the world. Loftus and Palmer (1974)
showed experimental subjects a movie of an auto accident. Subjects who were asked “How
fast were the cars going when they contacted each other?” reported an average of 32 mph,
while subjects who were asked the question with the word “smashed” instead of “contacted”
reported 41mph for the same cars in the same movie.

288
Chapter
8.
First-Order Logic
In a ﬁrst-order logic reasoning system that uses CNF, we can see that the linguistic form
“¬(A ∨B)” and “¬A ∧¬B” are the same because we can look inside the system and see
that the two sentences are stored as the same canonical CNF form. Can we do that with the
human brain? Until recently the answer was “no,” but now it is “maybe.” Mitchell et al.
(2008) put subjects in an fMRI (functional magnetic resonance imaging) machine, showed
them words such as “celery,” and imaged their brains. The researchers were then able to train
a computer program to predict, from a brain image, what word the subject had been presented
with. Given two choices (e.g., “celery” or “airplane”), the system predicts correctly 77% of
the time. The system can even predict at above-chance levels for words it has never seen
an fMRI image of before (by considering the images of related words) and for people it has
never seen before (proving that fMRI reveals some level of common representation across
people). This type of work is still in its infancy, but fMRI (and other imaging technology
such as intracranial electrophysiology (Sahin et al., 2009)) promises to give us much more
concrete ideas of what human knowledge representations are like.
From the viewpoint of formal logic, representing the same knowledge in two different
ways makes absolutely no difference; the same facts will be derivable from either represen-
tation. In practice, however, one representation might require fewer steps to derive a conclu-
sion, meaning that a reasoner with limited resources could get to the conclusion using one
representation but not the other. For nondeductive tasks such as learning from experience,
outcomes are necessarily dependent on the form of the representations used. We show in
Chapter 18 that when a learning program considers two possible theories of the world, both
of which are consistent with all the data, the most common way of breaking the tie is to choose
the most succinct theory—and that depends on the language used to represent theories. Thus,
the inﬂuence of language on thought is unavoidable for any agent that does learning.
8.1.2
Combining the best of formal and natural languages
We can adopt the foundation of propositional logic—a declarative, compositional semantics
that is context-independent and unambiguous—and build a more expressive logic on that
foundation, borrowing representational ideas from natural language while avoiding its draw-
backs. When we look at the syntax of natural language, the most obvious elements are nouns
and noun phrases that refer to objects (squares, pits, wumpuses) and verbs and verb phrases
OBJECT
that refer to relations among objects (is breezy, is adjacent to, shoots). Some of these rela-
RELATION
tions are functions—relations in which there is only one “value” for a given “input.” It is
FUNCTION
easy to start listing examples of objects, relations, and functions:
• Objects: people, houses, numbers, theories, Ronald McDonald, colors, baseball games,
wars, centuries . . .
• Relations: these can be unary relations or properties such as red, round, bogus, prime,
PROPERTY
multistoried . . ., or more general n-ary relations such as brother of, bigger than, inside,
part of, has color, occurred after, owns, comes between, . . .
• Functions: father of, best friend, third inning of, one more than, beginning of . . .
Indeed, almost any assertion can be thought of as referring to objects and properties or rela-
tions. Some examples follow:

Section 8.1.
Representation Revisited
289
• “One plus two equals three.”
Objects: one, two, three, one plus two; Relation: equals; Function: plus. (“One plus
two” is a name for the object that is obtained by applying the function “plus” to the
objects “one” and “two.” “Three” is another name for this object.)
• “Squares neighboring the wumpus are smelly.”
Objects: wumpus, squares; Property: smelly; Relation: neighboring.
• “Evil King John ruled England in 1200.”
Objects: John, England, 1200; Relation: ruled; Properties: evil, king.
The language of ﬁrst-order logic, whose syntax and semantics we deﬁne in the next section,
is built around objects and relations. It has been so important to mathematics, philosophy, and
artiﬁcial intelligence precisely because those ﬁelds—and indeed, much of everyday human
existence—can be usefully thought of as dealing with objects and the relations among them.
First-order logic can also express facts about some or all of the objects in the universe. This
enables one to represent general laws or rules, such as the statement “Squares neighboring
the wumpus are smelly.”
The primary difference between propositional and ﬁrst-order logic lies in the ontologi-
cal commitment made by each language—that is, what it assumes about the nature of reality.
ONTOLOGICAL
COMMITMENT
Mathematically, this commitment is expressed through the nature of the formal models with
respect to which the truth of sentences is deﬁned. For example, propositional logic assumes
that there are facts that either hold or do not hold in the world. Each fact can be in one
of two states: true or false, and each model assigns true or false to each proposition sym-
bol (see Section 7.4.2).2 First-order logic assumes more; namely, that the world consists of
objects with certain relations among them that do or do not hold. The formal models are
correspondingly more complicated than those for propositional logic. Special-purpose logics
make still further ontological commitments; for example, temporal logic assumes that facts
TEMPORAL LOGIC
hold at particular times and that those times (which may be points or intervals) are ordered.
Thus, special-purpose logics give certain kinds of objects (and the axioms about them) “ﬁrst
class” status within the logic, rather than simply deﬁning them within the knowledge base.
Higher-order logic views the relations and functions referred to by ﬁrst-order logic as ob-
HIGHER-ORDER
LOGIC
jects in themselves. This allows one to make assertions about all relations—for example, one
could wish to deﬁne what it means for a relation to be transitive. Unlike most special-purpose
logics, higher-order logic is strictly more expressive than ﬁrst-order logic, in the sense that
some sentences of higher-order logic cannot be expressed by any ﬁnite number of ﬁrst-order
logic sentences.
A logic can also be characterized by its epistemological commitments—the possible
EPISTEMOLOGICAL
COMMITMENT
states of knowledge that it allows with respect to each fact. In both propositional and ﬁrst-
order logic, a sentence represents a fact and the agent either believes the sentence to be true,
believes it to be false, or has no opinion. These logics therefore have three possible states
of knowledge regarding any sentence. Systems using probability theory, on the other hand,
2 In contrast, facts in fuzzy logic have a degree of truth between 0 and 1. For example, the sentence “Vienna is
a large city” might be true in our world only to degree 0.6 in fuzzy logic.

290
Chapter
8.
First-Order Logic
can have any degree of belief, ranging from 0 (total disbelief) to 1 (total belief).3 For ex-
ample, a probabilistic wumpus-world agent might believe that the wumpus is in [1,3] with
probability 0.75. The ontological and epistemological commitments of ﬁve different logics
are summarized in Figure 8.1.
Language
Ontological Commitment
Epistemological Commitment
(What exists in the world)
(What an agent believes about facts)
Propositional logic
facts
true/false/unknown
First-order logic
facts, objects, relations
true/false/unknown
Temporal logic
facts, objects, relations, times
true/false/unknown
Probability theory
facts
degree of belief ∈[0, 1]
Fuzzy logic
facts with degree of truth ∈[0, 1]
known interval value
Figure 8.1
Formal languages and their ontological and epistemological commitments.
In the next section, we will launch into the details of ﬁrst-order logic. Just as a student of
physics requires some familiarity with mathematics, a student of AI must develop a talent for
working with logical notation. On the other hand, it is also important not to get too concerned
with the speciﬁcs of logical notation—after all, there are dozens of different versions. The
main things to keep hold of are how the language facilitates concise representations and how
its semantics leads to sound reasoning procedures.
8.2
SYNTAX AND SEMANTICS OF FIRST-ORDER LOGIC
We begin this section by specifying more precisely the way in which the possible worlds
of ﬁrst-order logic reﬂect the ontological commitment to objects and relations. Then we
introduce the various elements of the language, explaining their semantics as we go along.
8.2.1
Models for ﬁrst-order logic
Recall from Chapter 7 that the models of a logical language are the formal structures that
constitute the possible worlds under consideration. Each model links the vocabulary of the
logical sentences to elements of the possible world, so that the truth of any sentence can
be determined. Thus, models for propositional logic link proposition symbols to predeﬁned
truth values. Models for ﬁrst-order logic are much more interesting. First, they have objects
in them! The domain of a model is the set of objects or domain elements it contains. The do-
DOMAIN
DOMAIN ELEMENTS
main is required to be nonempty—every possible world must contain at least one object. (See
Exercise 8.7 for a discussion of empty worlds.) Mathematically speaking, it doesn’t matter
what these objects are—all that matters is how many there are in each particular model—but
for pedagogical purposes we’ll use a concrete example. Figure 8.2 shows a model with ﬁve
3 It is important not to confuse the degree of belief in probability theory with the degree of truth in fuzzy logic.
Indeed, some fuzzy systems allow uncertainty (degree of belief) about degrees of truth.

Section 8.2.
Syntax and Semantics of First-Order Logic
291
objects: Richard the Lionheart, King of England from 1189 to 1199; his younger brother, the
evil King John, who ruled from 1199 to 1215; the left legs of Richard and John; and a crown.
The objects in the model may be related in various ways. In the ﬁgure, Richard and
John are brothers. Formally speaking, a relation is just the set of tuples of objects that are
TUPLE
related. (A tuple is a collection of objects arranged in a ﬁxed order and is written with angle
brackets surrounding the objects.) Thus, the brotherhood relation in this model is the set
{ ⟨Richard the Lionheart, King John⟩, ⟨King John, Richard the Lionheart⟩} .
(8.1)
(Here we have named the objects in English, but you may, if you wish, mentally substitute the
pictures for the names.) The crown is on King John’s head, so the “on head” relation contains
just one tuple, ⟨the crown, King John⟩. The “brother” and “on head” relations are binary
relations—that is, they relate pairs of objects. The model also contains unary relations, or
properties: the “person” property is true of both Richard and John; the “king” property is true
only of John (presumably because Richard is dead at this point); and the “crown” property is
true only of the crown.
Certain kinds of relationships are best considered as functions, in that a given object
must be related to exactly one object in this way. For example, each person has one left leg,
so the model has a unary “left leg” function that includes the following mappings:
⟨Richard the Lionheart⟩→Richard’s left leg
⟨King John⟩→John’s left leg .
(8.2)
Strictly speaking, models in ﬁrst-order logic require total functions, that is, there must be a
TOTAL FUNCTIONS
value for every input tuple. Thus, the crown must have a left leg and so must each of the left
legs. There is a technical solution to this awkward problem involving an additional “invisible”
R
J
$
left leg
on head
brother
brother
person
person
king
crown
left leg
Figure 8.2
A model containing ﬁve objects, two binary relations, three unary relations
(indicated by labels on the objects), and one unary function, left-leg.

292
Chapter
8.
First-Order Logic
object that is the left leg of everything that has no left leg, including itself. Fortunately, as
long as one makes no assertions about the left legs of things that have no left legs, these
technicalities are of no import.
So far, we have described the elements that populate models for ﬁrst-order logic. The
other essential part of a model is the link between those elements and the vocabulary of the
logical sentences, which we explain next.
8.2.2
Symbols and interpretations
We turn now to the syntax of ﬁrst-order logic. The impatient reader can obtain a complete
description from the formal grammar in Figure 8.3.
The basic syntactic elements of ﬁrst-order logic are the symbols that stand for objects,
relations, and functions. The symbols, therefore, come in three kinds: constant symbols,
CONSTANT SYMBOL
which stand for objects; predicate symbols, which stand for relations; and function sym-
PREDICATE SYMBOL
bols, which stand for functions. We adopt the convention that these symbols will begin with
FUNCTION SYMBOL
uppercase letters. For example, we might use the constant symbols Richard and John; the
predicate symbols Brother, OnHead, Person, King, and Crown; and the function symbol
LeftLeg. As with proposition symbols, the choice of names is entirely up to the user. Each
predicate and function symbol comes with an arity that ﬁxes the number of arguments.
ARITY
As in propositional logic, every model must provide the information required to deter-
mine if any given sentence is true or false. Thus, in addition to its objects, relations, and
functions, each model includes an interpretation that speciﬁes exactly which objects, rela-
INTERPRETATION
tions and functions are referred to by the constant, predicate, and function symbols. One
possible interpretation for our example—which a logician would call the intended interpre-
tation—is as follows:
INTENDED
INTERPRETATION
• Richard refers to Richard the Lionheart and John refers to the evil King John.
• Brother refers to the brotherhood relation, that is, the set of tuples of objects given in
Equation (8.1); OnHead refers to the “on head” relation that holds between the crown
and King John; Person, King, and Crown refer to the sets of objects that are persons,
kings, and crowns.
• LeftLeg refers to the “left leg” function, that is, the mapping given in Equation (8.2).
There are many other possible interpretations, of course. For example, one interpretation
maps Richard to the crown and John to King John’s left leg. There are ﬁve objects in
the model, so there are 25 possible interpretations just for the constant symbols Richard
and John. Notice that not all the objects need have a name—for example, the intended
interpretation does not name the crown or the legs. It is also possible for an object to have
several names; there is an interpretation under which both Richard and John refer to the
crown.4 If you ﬁnd this possibility confusing, remember that, in propositional logic, it is
perfectly possible to have a model in which Cloudy and Sunny are both true; it is the job of
the knowledge base to rule out models that are inconsistent with our knowledge.
4 Later, in Section 8.2.8, we examine a semantics in which every object has exactly one name.

Section 8.2.
Syntax and Semantics of First-Order Logic
293
Sentence
→
AtomicSentence | ComplexSentence
AtomicSentence
→
Predicate | Predicate(Term, . . .) | Term = Term
ComplexSentence
→
( Sentence ) | [ Sentence ]
|
¬ Sentence
|
Sentence ∧Sentence
|
Sentence ∨Sentence
|
Sentence
⇒Sentence
|
Sentence
⇔
Sentence
|
Quantiﬁer Variable, . . . Sentence
Term
→
Function(Term, . . .)
|
Constant
|
Variable
Quantiﬁer
→
∀| ∃
Constant
→
A | X1 | John | · · ·
Variable
→
a | x | s | · · ·
Predicate
→
True | False | After | Loves | Raining | · · ·
Function
→
Mother | LeftLeg | · · ·
OPERATOR PRECEDENCE
:
¬, =, ∧, ∨, ⇒, ⇔
Figure 8.3
The syntax of ﬁrst-order logic with equality, speciﬁed in Backus–Naur form
(see page 1060 if you are not familiar with this notation). Operator precedences are speciﬁed,
from highest to lowest. The precedence of quantiﬁers is such that a quantiﬁer holds over
everything to the right of it.
R
J
R
J
R
J
R
J
R
J
R
J
. . .
. . .
. . .
Figure 8.4
Some members of the set of all models for a language with two constant sym-
bols, R and J, and one binary relation symbol. The interpretation of each constant symbol is
shown by a gray arrow. Within each model, the related objects are connected by arrows.

294
Chapter
8.
First-Order Logic
In summary, a model in ﬁrst-order logic consists of a set of objects and an interpretation
that maps constant symbols to objects, predicate symbols to relations on those objects, and
function symbols to functions on those objects. Just as with propositional logic, entailment,
validity, and so on are deﬁned in terms of all possible models. To get an idea of what the
set of all possible models looks like, see Figure 8.4. It shows that models vary in how many
objects they contain—from one up to inﬁnity—and in the way the constant symbols map
to objects. If there are two constant symbols and one object, then both symbols must refer
to the same object; but this can still happen even with more objects. When there are more
objects than constant symbols, some of the objects will have no names. Because the number
of possible models is unbounded, checking entailment by the enumeration of all possible
models is not feasible for ﬁrst-order logic (unlike propositional logic). Even if the number of
objects is restricted, the number of combinations can be very large. (See Exercise 8.5.) For
the example in Figure 8.4, there are 137,506,194,466 models with six or fewer objects.
8.2.3
Terms
A term is a logical expression that refers to an object. Constant symbols are therefore terms,
TERM
but it is not always convenient to have a distinct symbol to name every object. For example,
in English we might use the expression “King John’s left leg” rather than giving a name
to his leg. This is what function symbols are for: instead of using a constant symbol, we
use LeftLeg(John). In the general case, a complex term is formed by a function symbol
followed by a parenthesized list of terms as arguments to the function symbol. It is important
to remember that a complex term is just a complicated kind of name. It is not a “subroutine
call” that “returns a value.” There is no LeftLeg subroutine that takes a person as input and
returns a leg. We can reason about left legs (e.g., stating the general rule that everyone has one
and then deducing that John must have one) without ever providing a deﬁnition of LeftLeg.
This is something that cannot be done with subroutines in programming languages.5
The formal semantics of terms is straightforward. Consider a term f(t1, . . . , tn). The
function symbol f refers to some function in the model (call it F); the argument terms refer
to objects in the domain (call them d1, . . . , dn); and the term as a whole refers to the object
that is the value of the function F applied to d1, . . . , dn. For example, suppose the LeftLeg
function symbol refers to the function shown in Equation (8.2) and John refers to King John,
then LeftLeg(John) refers to King John’s left leg. In this way, the interpretation ﬁxes the
referent of every term.
8.2.4
Atomic sentences
Now that we have both terms for referring to objects and predicate symbols for referring to
relations, we can put them together to make atomic sentences that state facts. An atomic
5 λ-expressions provide a useful notation in which new function symbols are constructed “on the ﬂy.” For
example, the function that squares its argument can be written as (λx x × x) and can be applied to arguments
just like any other function symbol. A λ-expression can also be deﬁned and used as a predicate symbol. (See
Chapter 22.) The lambda operator in Lisp plays exactly the same role. Notice that the use of λ in this way does
not increase the formal expressive power of ﬁrst-order logic, because any sentence that includes a λ-expression
can be rewritten by “plugging in” its arguments to yield an equivalent sentence.

Section 8.2.
Syntax and Semantics of First-Order Logic
295
sentence (or atom for short) is formed from a predicate symbol optionally followed by a
ATOMIC SENTENCE
ATOM
parenthesized list of terms, such as
Brother(Richard, John).
This states, under the intended interpretation given earlier, that Richard the Lionheart is the
brother of King John.6 Atomic sentences can have complex terms as arguments. Thus,
Married(Father(Richard), Mother(John))
states that Richard the Lionheart’s father is married to King John’s mother (again, under a
suitable interpretation).
An atomic sentence is true in a given model if the relation referred to by the predicate
symbol holds among the objects referred to by the arguments.
8.2.5
Complex sentences
We can use logical connectives to construct more complex sentences, with the same syntax
and semantics as in propositional calculus. Here are four sentences that are true in the model
of Figure 8.2 under our intended interpretation:
¬Brother(LeftLeg(Richard), John)
Brother(Richard, John) ∧Brother(John, Richard)
King(Richard) ∨King(John)
¬King(Richard) ⇒King(John) .
8.2.6
Quantiﬁers
Once we have a logic that allows objects, it is only natural to want to express properties of
entire collections of objects, instead of enumerating the objects by name. Quantiﬁers let us
QUANTIFIER
do this. First-order logic contains two standard quantiﬁers, called universal and existential.
Universal quantiﬁcation (∀)
Recall the difﬁculty we had in Chapter 7 with the expression of general rules in proposi-
tional logic. Rules such as “Squares neighboring the wumpus are smelly” and “All kings
are persons” are the bread and butter of ﬁrst-order logic. We deal with the ﬁrst of these in
Section 8.3. The second rule, “All kings are persons,” is written in ﬁrst-order logic as
∀x King(x) ⇒Person(x) .
∀is usually pronounced “For all . . .”. (Remember that the upside-down A stands for “all.”)
Thus, the sentence says, “For all x, if x is a king, then x is a person.” The symbol x is called
a variable. By convention, variables are lowercase letters. A variable is a term all by itself,
VARIABLE
and as such can also serve as the argument of a function—for example, LeftLeg(x). A term
with no variables is called a ground term.
GROUND TERM
Intuitively, the sentence ∀x P, where P is any logical expression, says that P is true
for every object x. More precisely, ∀x P is true in a given model if P is true in all possible
extended interpretations constructed from the interpretation given in the model, where each
EXTENDED
INTERPRETATION
6 We usually follow the argument-ordering convention that P(x, y) is read as “x is a P of y.”

296
Chapter
8.
First-Order Logic
extended interpretation speciﬁes a domain element to which x refers.
This sounds complicated, but it is really just a careful way of stating the intuitive mean-
ing of universal quantiﬁcation. Consider the model shown in Figure 8.2 and the intended
interpretation that goes with it. We can extend the interpretation in ﬁve ways:
x →Richard the Lionheart,
x →King John,
x →Richard’s left leg,
x →John’s left leg,
x →the crown.
The universally quantiﬁed sentence ∀x King(x) ⇒Person(x) is true in the original model
if the sentence King(x) ⇒Person(x) is true under each of the ﬁve extended interpreta-
tions. That is, the universally quantiﬁed sentence is equivalent to asserting the following ﬁve
sentences:
Richard the Lionheart is a king ⇒Richard the Lionheart is a person.
King John is a king ⇒King John is a person.
Richard’s left leg is a king ⇒Richard’s left leg is a person.
John’s left leg is a king ⇒John’s left leg is a person.
The crown is a king ⇒the crown is a person.
Let us look carefully at this set of assertions. Since, in our model, King John is the only
king, the second sentence asserts that he is a person, as we would hope. But what about
the other four sentences, which appear to make claims about legs and crowns? Is that part
of the meaning of “All kings are persons”? In fact, the other four assertions are true in the
model, but make no claim whatsoever about the personhood qualiﬁcations of legs, crowns,
or indeed Richard. This is because none of these objects is a king. Looking at the truth table
for ⇒(Figure 7.8 on page 246), we see that the implication is true whenever its premise is
false—regardless of the truth of the conclusion. Thus, by asserting the universally quantiﬁed
sentence, which is equivalent to asserting a whole list of individual implications, we end
up asserting the conclusion of the rule just for those objects for whom the premise is true
and saying nothing at all about those individuals for whom the premise is false. Thus, the
truth-table deﬁnition of ⇒turns out to be perfect for writing general rules with universal
quantiﬁers.
A common mistake, made frequently even by diligent readers who have read this para-
graph several times, is to use conjunction instead of implication. The sentence
∀x King(x) ∧Person(x)
would be equivalent to asserting
Richard the Lionheart is a king ∧Richard the Lionheart is a person,
King John is a king ∧King John is a person,
Richard’s left leg is a king ∧Richard’s left leg is a person,
and so on. Obviously, this does not capture what we want.

Section 8.2.
Syntax and Semantics of First-Order Logic
297
Existential quantiﬁcation (∃)
Universal quantiﬁcation makes statements about every object. Similarly, we can make a state-
ment about some object in the universe without naming it, by using an existential quantiﬁer.
To say, for example, that King John has a crown on his head, we write
∃x Crown(x) ∧OnHead(x, John) .
∃x is pronounced “There exists an x such that . . .” or “For some x . . .”.
Intuitively, the sentence ∃x P says that P is true for at least one object x. More
precisely, ∃x P is true in a given model if P is true in at least one extended interpretation
that assigns x to a domain element. That is, at least one of the following is true:
Richard the Lionheart is a crown ∧Richard the Lionheart is on John’s head;
King John is a crown ∧King John is on John’s head;
Richard’s left leg is a crown ∧Richard’s left leg is on John’s head;
John’s left leg is a crown ∧John’s left leg is on John’s head;
The crown is a crown ∧the crown is on John’s head.
The ﬁfth assertion is true in the model, so the original existentially quantiﬁed sentence is
true in the model. Notice that, by our deﬁnition, the sentence would also be true in a model
in which King John was wearing two crowns. This is entirely consistent with the original
sentence “King John has a crown on his head.” 7
Just as ⇒appears to be the natural connective to use with ∀, ∧is the natural connective
to use with ∃. Using ∧as the main connective with ∀led to an overly strong statement in
the example in the previous section; using ⇒with ∃usually leads to a very weak statement,
indeed. Consider the following sentence:
∃x Crown(x) ⇒OnHead(x, John) .
On the surface, this might look like a reasonable rendition of our sentence. Applying the
semantics, we see that the sentence says that at least one of the following assertions is true:
Richard the Lionheart is a crown ⇒Richard the Lionheart is on John’s head;
King John is a crown ⇒King John is on John’s head;
Richard’s left leg is a crown ⇒Richard’s left leg is on John’s head;
and so on. Now an implication is true if both premise and conclusion are true, or if its premise
is false. So if Richard the Lionheart is not a crown, then the ﬁrst assertion is true and the
existential is satisﬁed. So, an existentially quantiﬁed implication sentence is true whenever
any object fails to satisfy the premise; hence such sentences really do not say much at all.
Nested quantiﬁers
We will often want to express more complex sentences using multiple quantiﬁers. The sim-
plest case is where the quantiﬁers are of the same type. For example, “Brothers are siblings”
can be written as
∀x ∀y Brother(x, y) ⇒Sibling(x, y) .
7 There is a variant of the existential quantiﬁer, usually written ∃1 or ∃!, that means “There exists exactly one.”
The same meaning can be expressed using equality statements.

298
Chapter
8.
First-Order Logic
Consecutive quantiﬁers of the same type can be written as one quantiﬁer with several vari-
ables. For example, to say that siblinghood is a symmetric relationship, we can write
∀x, y Sibling(x, y) ⇔Sibling(y, x) .
In other cases we will have mixtures. “Everybody loves somebody” means that for every
person, there is someone that person loves:
∀x ∃y Loves(x, y) .
On the other hand, to say “There is someone who is loved by everyone,” we write
∃y ∀x Loves(x, y) .
The order of quantiﬁcation is therefore very important. It becomes clearer if we insert paren-
theses. ∀x (∃y Loves(x, y)) says that everyone has a particular property, namely, the prop-
erty that they love someone. On the other hand, ∃y (∀x Loves(x, y)) says that someone in
the world has a particular property, namely the property of being loved by everybody.
Some confusion can arise when two quantiﬁers are used with the same variable name.
Consider the sentence
∀x (Crown(x) ∨(∃x Brother(Richard, x))) .
Here the x in Brother(Richard, x) is existentially quantiﬁed. The rule is that the variable
belongs to the innermost quantiﬁer that mentions it; then it will not be subject to any other
quantiﬁcation. Another way to think of it is this: ∃x Brother(Richard, x) is a sentence
about Richard (that he has a brother), not about x; so putting a ∀x outside it has no effect. It
could equally well have been written ∃z Brother(Richard, z). Because this can be a source
of confusion, we will always use different variable names with nested quantiﬁers.
Connections between ∀and ∃
The two quantiﬁers are actually intimately connected with each other, through negation. As-
serting that everyone dislikes parsnips is the same as asserting there does not exist someone
who likes them, and vice versa:
∀x ¬Likes(x, Parsnips)
is equivalent to
¬∃x Likes(x, Parsnips) .
We can go one step further: “Everyone likes ice cream” means that there is no one who does
not like ice cream:
∀x Likes(x, IceCream)
is equivalent to
¬∃x ¬Likes(x, IceCream) .
Because ∀is really a conjunction over the universe of objects and ∃is a disjunction, it should
not be surprising that they obey De Morgan’s rules. The De Morgan rules for quantiﬁed and
unquantiﬁed sentences are as follows:
∀x ¬P
≡¬∃x P
¬(P ∨Q) ≡¬P ∧¬Q
¬∀x P
≡∃x ¬P
¬(P ∧Q) ≡¬P ∨¬Q
∀x P
≡¬∃x ¬P
P ∧Q
≡¬(¬P ∨¬Q)
∃x P
≡¬∀x ¬P
P ∨Q
≡¬(¬P ∧¬Q) .
Thus, we do not really need both ∀and ∃, just as we do not really need both ∧and ∨. Still,
readability is more important than parsimony, so we will keep both of the quantiﬁers.

Section 8.2.
Syntax and Semantics of First-Order Logic
299
8.2.7
Equality
First-order logic includes one more way to make atomic sentences, other than using a predi-
cate and terms as described earlier. We can use the equality symbol to signify that two terms
EQUALITY SYMBOL
refer to the same object. For example,
Father(John) = Henry
says that the object referred to by Father(John) and the object referred to by Henry are the
same. Because an interpretation ﬁxes the referent of any term, determining the truth of an
equality sentence is simply a matter of seeing that the referents of the two terms are the same
object.
The equality symbol can be used to state facts about a given function, as we just did for
the Father symbol. It can also be used with negation to insist that two terms are not the same
object. To say that Richard has at least two brothers, we would write
∃x, y Brother(x, Richard) ∧Brother(y, Richard) ∧¬(x = y) .
The sentence
∃x, y Brother(x, Richard) ∧Brother(y, Richard)
does not have the intended meaning. In particular, it is true in the model of Figure 8.2, where
Richard has only one brother. To see this, consider the extended interpretation in which both
x and y are assigned to King John. The addition of ¬(x = y) rules out such models. The
notation x̸ = y is sometimes used as an abbreviation for ¬(x = y).
8.2.8
An alternative semantics?
Continuing the example from the previous section, suppose that we believe that Richard has
two brothers, John and Geoffrey.8 Can we capture this state of affairs by asserting
Brother(John, Richard) ∧Brother(Geoﬀrey, Richard) ?
(8.3)
Not quite. First, this assertion is true in a model where Richard has only one brother—
we need to add John̸ = Geoﬀrey. Second, the sentence doesn’t rule out models in which
Richard has many more brothers besides John and Geoffrey. Thus, the correct translation of
“Richard’s brothers are John and Geoffrey” is as follows:
Brother(John, Richard) ∧Brother(Geoﬀrey, Richard) ∧John̸ = Geoﬀrey
∧∀x Brother(x, Richard) ⇒(x = John ∨x = Geoﬀrey) .
For many purposes, this seems much more cumbersome than the corresponding natural-
language expression. As a consequence, humans may make mistakes in translating their
knowledge into ﬁrst-order logic, resulting in unintuitive behaviors from logical reasoning
systems that use the knowledge. Can we devise a semantics that allows a more straightfor-
ward logical expression?
One proposal that is very popular in database systems works as follows. First, we insist
that every constant symbol refer to a distinct object—the so-called unique-names assump-
tion. Second, we assume that atomic sentences not known to be true are in fact false—the
UNIQUE-NAMES
ASSUMPTION
closed-world assumption. Finally, we invoke domain closure, meaning that each model
CLOSED-WORLD
ASSUMPTION
DOMAIN CLOSURE
8 Actually he had four, the others being William and Henry.

300
Chapter
8.
First-Order Logic
. . .
R
J
R
J
R
J
R
J
R
J
R
J
R
J
R
J
R
J
R
J
Figure 8.5
Some members of the set of all models for a language with two constant sym-
bols, R and J, and one binary relation symbol, under database semantics. The interpretation
of the constant symbols is ﬁxed, and there is a distinct object for each constant symbol.
contains no more domain elements than those named by the constant symbols. Under the
resulting semantics, which we call database semantics to distinguish it from the standard
DATABASE
SEMANTICS
semantics of ﬁrst-order logic, the sentence Equation (8.3) does indeed state that Richard’s
two brothers are John and Geoffrey. Database semantics is also used in logic programming
systems, as explained in Section 9.4.5.
It is instructive to consider the set of all possible models under database semantics for
the same case as shown in Figure 8.4. Figure 8.5 shows some of the models, ranging from
the model with no tuples satisfying the relation to the model with all tuples satisfying the
relation. With two objects, there are four possible two-element tuples, so there are 24 = 16
different subsets of tuples that can satisfy the relation. Thus, there are 16 possible models in
all—a lot fewer than the inﬁnitely many models for the standard ﬁrst-order semantics. On the
other hand, the database semantics requires deﬁnite knowledge of what the world contains.
This example brings up an important point: there is no one “correct” semantics for
logic. The usefulness of any proposed semantics depends on how concise and intuitive it
makes the expression of the kinds of knowledge we want to write down, and on how easy
and natural it is to develop the corresponding rules of inference. Database semantics is most
useful when we are certain about the identity of all the objects described in the knowledge
base and when we have all the facts at hand; in other cases, it is quite awkward. For the rest
of this chapter, we assume the standard semantics while noting instances in which this choice
leads to cumbersome expressions.
8.3
USING FIRST-ORDER LOGIC
Now that we have deﬁned an expressive logical language, it is time to learn how to use it. The
best way to do this is through examples. We have seen some simple sentences illustrating the
various aspects of logical syntax; in this section, we provide more systematic representations
of some simple domains. In knowledge representation, a domain is just some part of the
DOMAIN
world about which we wish to express some knowledge.
We begin with a brief description of the TELL/ASK interface for ﬁrst-order knowledge
bases. Then we look at the domains of family relationships, numbers, sets, and lists, and at

Section 8.3.
Using First-Order Logic
301
the wumpus world. The next section contains a more substantial example (electronic circuits)
and Chapter 12 covers everything in the universe.
8.3.1
Assertions and queries in ﬁrst-order logic
Sentences are added to a knowledge base using TELL, exactly as in propositional logic. Such
sentences are called assertions. For example, we can assert that John is a king, Richard is a
ASSERTION
person, and all kings are persons:
TELL(KB, King(John)) .
TELL(KB, Person(Richard)) .
TELL(KB, ∀x King(x) ⇒Person(x)) .
We can ask questions of the knowledge base using ASK. For example,
ASK(KB, King(John))
returns true. Questions asked with ASK are called queries or goals. Generally speaking, any
QUERY
GOAL
query that is logically entailed by the knowledge base should be answered afﬁrmatively. For
example, given the two preceding assertions, the query
ASK(KB, Person(John))
should also return true. We can ask quantiﬁed queries, such as
ASK(KB, ∃x Person(x)) .
The answer is true, but this is perhaps not as helpful as we would like. It is rather like
answering “Can you tell me the time?” with “Yes.” If we want to know what value of x
makes the sentence true, we will need a different function, ASKVARS, which we call with
ASKVARS(KB, Person(x))
and which yields a stream of answers. In this case there will be two answers: {x/John} and
{x/Richard}. Such an answer is called a substitution or binding list. ASKVARS is usually
SUBSTITUTION
BINDING LIST
reserved for knowledge bases consisting solely of Horn clauses, because in such knowledge
bases every way of making the query true will bind the variables to speciﬁc values. That is
not the case with ﬁrst-order logic; if KB has been told King(John) ∨King(Richard), then
there is no binding to x for the query ∃x King(x), even though the query is true.
8.3.2
The kinship domain
The ﬁrst example we consider is the domain of family relationships, or kinship. This domain
includes facts such as “Elizabeth is the mother of Charles” and “Charles is the father of
William” and rules such as “One’s grandmother is the mother of one’s parent.”
Clearly, the objects in our domain are people. We have two unary predicates, Male and
Female. Kinship relations—parenthood, brotherhood, marriage, and so on—are represented
by binary predicates: Parent, Sibling, Brother, Sister, Child, Daughter, Son, Spouse,
Wife, Husband, Grandparent, Grandchild, Cousin, Aunt, and Uncle. We use functions
for Mother and Father, because every person has exactly one of each of these (at least
according to nature’s design).

302
Chapter
8.
First-Order Logic
We can go through each function and predicate, writing down what we know in terms
of the other symbols. For example, one’s mother is one’s female parent:
∀m, c Mother(c) = m ⇔Female(m) ∧Parent(m, c) .
One’s husband is one’s male spouse:
∀w, h Husband(h, w) ⇔Male(h) ∧Spouse(h, w) .
Male and female are disjoint categories:
∀x Male(x) ⇔¬Female(x) .
Parent and child are inverse relations:
∀p, c Parent(p, c) ⇔Child(c, p) .
A grandparent is a parent of one’s parent:
∀g, c Grandparent(g, c) ⇔∃p Parent(g, p) ∧Parent(p, c) .
A sibling is another child of one’s parents:
∀x, y Sibling(x, y) ⇔x̸ = y ∧∃p Parent(p, x) ∧Parent(p, y) .
We could go on for several more pages like this, and Exercise 8.14 asks you to do just that.
Each of these sentences can be viewed as an axiom of the kinship domain, as explained
in Section 7.1. Axioms are commonly associated with purely mathematical domains—we
will see some axioms for numbers shortly—but they are needed in all domains. They provide
the basic factual information from which useful conclusions can be derived. Our kinship
axioms are also deﬁnitions; they have the form ∀x, y P(x, y) ⇔
. . .. The axioms deﬁne
DEFINITION
the Mother function and the Husband, Male, Parent, Grandparent, and Sibling predicates
in terms of other predicates. Our deﬁnitions “bottom out” at a basic set of predicates (Child,
Spouse, and Female) in terms of which the others are ultimately deﬁned. This is a natural
way in which to build up the representation of a domain, and it is analogous to the way in
which software packages are built up by successive deﬁnitions of subroutines from primitive
library functions. Notice that there is not necessarily a unique set of primitive predicates;
we could equally well have used Parent, Spouse, and Male. In some domains, as we show,
there is no clearly identiﬁable basic set.
Not all logical sentences about a domain are axioms. Some are theorems—that is, they
THEOREM
are entailed by the axioms. For example, consider the assertion that siblinghood is symmetric:
∀x, y Sibling(x, y) ⇔Sibling(y, x) .
Is this an axiom or a theorem? In fact, it is a theorem that follows logically from the axiom
that deﬁnes siblinghood. If we ASK the knowledge base this sentence, it should return true.
From a purely logical point of view, a knowledge base need contain only axioms and
no theorems, because the theorems do not increase the set of conclusions that follow from
the knowledge base. From a practical point of view, theorems are essential to reduce the
computational cost of deriving new sentences. Without them, a reasoning system has to start
from ﬁrst principles every time, rather like a physicist having to rederive the rules of calculus
for every new problem.

Section 8.3.
Using First-Order Logic
303
Not all axioms are deﬁnitions. Some provide more general information about certain
predicates without constituting a deﬁnition. Indeed, some predicates have no complete deﬁ-
nition because we do not know enough to characterize them fully. For example, there is no
obvious deﬁnitive way to complete the sentence
∀x Person(x) ⇔. . .
Fortunately, ﬁrst-order logic allows us to make use of the Person predicate without com-
pletely deﬁning it. Instead, we can write partial speciﬁcations of properties that every person
has and properties that make something a person:
∀x Person(x) ⇒. . .
∀x . . . ⇒Person(x) .
Axioms can also be “just plain facts,” such as Male(Jim) and Spouse(Jim, Laura).
Such facts form the descriptions of speciﬁc problem instances, enabling speciﬁc questions
to be answered. The answers to these questions will then be theorems that follow from
the axioms. Often, one ﬁnds that the expected answers are not forthcoming—for example,
from Spouse(Jim, Laura) one expects (under the laws of many countries) to be able to infer
¬Spouse(George, Laura); but this does not follow from the axioms given earlier—even after
we add Jim̸ = George as suggested in Section 8.2.8. This is a sign that an axiom is missing.
Exercise 8.8 asks the reader to supply it.
8.3.3
Numbers, sets, and lists
Numbers are perhaps the most vivid example of how a large theory can be built up from
a tiny kernel of axioms. We describe here the theory of natural numbers or non-negative
NATURAL NUMBERS
integers. We need a predicate NatNum that will be true of natural numbers; we need one
constant symbol, 0; and we need one function symbol, S (successor). The Peano axioms
PEANO AXIOMS
deﬁne natural numbers and addition.9 Natural numbers are deﬁned recursively:
NatNum(0) .
∀n NatNum(n) ⇒NatNum(S(n)) .
That is, 0 is a natural number, and for every object n, if n is a natural number, then S(n) is
a natural number. So the natural numbers are 0, S(0), S(S(0)), and so on. (After reading
Section 8.2.8, you will notice that these axioms allow for other natural numbers besides the
usual ones; see Exercise 8.12.) We also need axioms to constrain the successor function:
∀n 0̸ = S(n) .
∀m, n m̸ = n ⇒S(m)̸ = S(n) .
Now we can deﬁne addition in terms of the successor function:
∀m NatNum(m) ⇒+ (0, m) = m .
∀m, n NatNum(m) ∧NatNum(n) ⇒+ (S(m), n) = S(+(m, n)) .
The ﬁrst of these axioms says that adding 0 to any natural number m gives m itself. Notice
the use of the binary function symbol “+” in the term +(m, 0); in ordinary mathematics, the
term would be written m + 0 using inﬁx notation. (The notation we have used for ﬁrst-order
INFIX
9 The Peano axioms also include the principle of induction, which is a sentence of second-order logic rather
than of ﬁrst-order logic. The importance of this distinction is explained in Chapter 9.

304
Chapter
8.
First-Order Logic
logic is called preﬁx.) To make our sentences about numbers easier to read, we allow the use
PREFIX
of inﬁx notation. We can also write S(n) as n + 1, so the second axiom becomes
∀m, n NatNum(m) ∧NatNum(n) ⇒(m + 1) + n = (m + n) + 1 .
This axiom reduces addition to repeated application of the successor function.
The use of inﬁx notation is an example of syntactic sugar, that is, an extension to or
SYNTACTIC SUGAR
abbreviation of the standard syntax that does not change the semantics. Any sentence that
uses sugar can be “desugared” to produce an equivalent sentence in ordinary ﬁrst-order logic.
Once we have addition, it is straightforward to deﬁne multiplication as repeated addi-
tion, exponentiation as repeated multiplication, integer division and remainders, prime num-
bers, and so on. Thus, the whole of number theory (including cryptography) can be built up
from one constant, one function, one predicate and four axioms.
The domain of sets is also fundamental to mathematics as well as to commonsense
SET
reasoning. (In fact, it is possible to deﬁne number theory in terms of set theory.) We want to
be able to represent individual sets, including the empty set. We need a way to build up sets
by adding an element to a set or taking the union or intersection of two sets. We will want
to know whether an element is a member of a set and we will want to distinguish sets from
objects that are not sets.
We will use the normal vocabulary of set theory as syntactic sugar. The empty set is a
constant written as { }. There is one unary predicate, Set, which is true of sets. The binary
predicates are x ∈s (x is a member of set s) and s1 ⊆s2 (set s1 is a subset, not necessarily
proper, of set s2). The binary functions are s1 ∩s2 (the intersection of two sets), s1 ∪s2
(the union of two sets), and {x|s} (the set resulting from adjoining element x to set s). One
possible set of axioms is as follows:
1. The only sets are the empty set and those made by adjoining something to a set:
∀s Set(s) ⇔(s = { }) ∨(∃x, s2 Set(s2) ∧s = {x|s2}) .
2. The empty set has no elements adjoined into it. In other words, there is no way to
decompose { } into a smaller set and an element:
¬∃x, s {x|s} = { } .
3. Adjoining an element already in the set has no effect:
∀x, s x ∈s ⇔s = {x|s} .
4. The only members of a set are the elements that were adjoined into it. We express
this recursively, saying that x is a member of s if and only if s is equal to some set s2
adjoined with some element y, where either y is the same as x or x is a member of s2:
∀x, s x ∈s ⇔∃y, s2 (s = {y|s2} ∧(x = y ∨x ∈s2)) .
5. A set is a subset of another set if and only if all of the ﬁrst set’s members are members
of the second set:
∀s1, s2 s1 ⊆s2 ⇔(∀x x ∈s1 ⇒x ∈s2) .
6. Two sets are equal if and only if each is a subset of the other:
∀s1, s2 (s1 = s2) ⇔(s1 ⊆s2 ∧s2 ⊆s1) .

Section 8.3.
Using First-Order Logic
305
7. An object is in the intersection of two sets if and only if it is a member of both sets:
∀x, s1, s2 x ∈(s1 ∩s2) ⇔(x ∈s1 ∧x ∈s2) .
8. An object is in the union of two sets if and only if it is a member of either set:
∀x, s1, s2 x ∈(s1 ∪s2) ⇔(x ∈s1 ∨x ∈s2) .
Lists are similar to sets. The differences are that lists are ordered and the same element can
LIST
appear more than once in a list. We can use the vocabulary of Lisp for lists: Nil is the constant
list with no elements; Cons, Append, First, and Rest are functions; and Find is the pred-
icate that does for lists what Member does for sets. List? is a predicate that is true only of
lists. As with sets, it is common to use syntactic sugar in logical sentences involving lists. The
empty list is [ ]. The term Cons(x, y), where y is a nonempty list, is written [x|y]. The term
Cons(x, Nil) (i.e., the list containing the element x) is written as [x]. A list of several ele-
ments, such as [A, B, C], corresponds to the nested term Cons(A, Cons(B, Cons(C, Nil))).
Exercise 8.16 asks you to write out the axioms for lists.
8.3.4
The wumpus world
Some propositional logic axioms for the wumpus world were given in Chapter 7. The ﬁrst-
order axioms in this section are much more concise, capturing in a natural way exactly what
we want to say.
Recall that the wumpus agent receives a percept vector with ﬁve elements. The corre-
sponding ﬁrst-order sentence stored in the knowledge base must include both the percept and
the time at which it occurred; otherwise, the agent will get confused about when it saw what.
We use integers for time steps. A typical percept sentence would be
Percept([Stench, Breeze, Glitter, None, None], 5) .
Here, Percept is a binary predicate, and Stench and so on are constants placed in a list. The
actions in the wumpus world can be represented by logical terms:
Turn(Right), Turn(Left), Forward, Shoot, Grab, Climb .
To determine which is best, the agent program executes the query
ASKVARS(∃a BestAction(a, 5)) ,
which returns a binding list such as {a/Grab}. The agent program can then return Grab as
the action to take. The raw percept data implies certain facts about the current state. For
example:
∀t, s, g, m, c Percept([s, Breeze, g, m, c], t) ⇒Breeze(t) ,
∀t, s, b, m, c Percept([s, b, Glitter, m, c], t) ⇒Glitter(t) ,
and so on. These rules exhibit a trivial form of the reasoning process called perception, which
we study in depth in Chapter 24. Notice the quantiﬁcation over time t. In propositional logic,
we would need copies of each sentence for each time step.
Simple “reﬂex” behavior can also be implemented by quantiﬁed implication sentences.
For example, we have
∀t Glitter(t) ⇒BestAction(Grab, t) .

306
Chapter
8.
First-Order Logic
Given the percept and rules from the preceding paragraphs, this would yield the desired con-
clusion BestAction(Grab, 5)—that is, Grab is the right thing to do.
We have represented the agent’s inputs and outputs; now it is time to represent the
environment itself. Let us begin with objects. Obvious candidates are squares, pits, and the
wumpus. We could name each square—Square1,2 and so on—but then the fact that Square1,2
and Square1,3 are adjacent would have to be an “extra” fact, and we would need one such
fact for each pair of squares. It is better to use a complex term in which the row and column
appear as integers; for example, we can simply use the list term [1, 2]. Adjacency of any two
squares can be deﬁned as
∀x, y, a, b Adjacent([x, y], [a, b]) ⇔
(x = a ∧(y = b −1 ∨y = b + 1)) ∨(y = b ∧(x = a −1 ∨x = a + 1)) .
We could name each pit, but this would be inappropriate for a different reason: there is no
reason to distinguish among pits.10 It is simpler to use a unary predicate Pit that is true of
squares containing pits. Finally, since there is exactly one wumpus, a constant Wumpus is
just as good as a unary predicate (and perhaps more digniﬁed from the wumpus’s viewpoint).
The agent’s location changes over time, so we write At(Agent, s, t) to mean that the
agent is at square s at time t. We can ﬁx the wumpus’s location with ∀t At(Wumpus, [2, 2], t).
We can then say that objects can only be at one location at a time:
∀x, s1, s2, t At(x, s1, t) ∧At(x, s2, t) ⇒s1 = s2 .
Given its current location, the agent can infer properties of the square from properties of its
current percept. For example, if the agent is at a square and perceives a breeze, then that
square is breezy:
∀s, t At(Agent, s, t) ∧Breeze(t) ⇒Breezy(s) .
It is useful to know that a square is breezy because we know that the pits cannot move about.
Notice that Breezy has no time argument.
Having discovered which places are breezy (or smelly) and, very important, not breezy
(or not smelly), the agent can deduce where the pits are (and where the wumpus is). Whereas
propositional logic necessitates a separate axiom for each square (see R2 and R3 on page 247)
and would need a different set of axioms for each geographical layout of the world, ﬁrst-order
logic just needs one axiom:
∀s Breezy(s) ⇔∃r Adjacent(r, s) ∧Pit(r) .
(8.4)
Similarly, in ﬁrst-order logic we can quantify over time, so we need just one successor-state
axiom for each predicate, rather than a different copy for each time step. For example, the
axiom for the arrow (Equation (7.2) on page 267) becomes
∀t HaveArrow(t + 1) ⇔(HaveArrow(t) ∧¬Action(Shoot, t)) .
From these two example sentences, we can see that the ﬁrst-order logic formulation is no
less concise than the original English-language description given in Chapter 7. The reader
10 Similarly, most of us do not name each bird that ﬂies overhead as it migrates to warmer regions in winter. An
ornithologist wishing to study migration patterns, survival rates, and so on does name each bird, by means of a
ring on its leg, because individual birds must be tracked.

Section 8.4.
Knowledge Engineering in First-Order Logic
307
is invited to construct analogous axioms for the agent’s location and orientation; in these
cases, the axioms quantify over both space and time. As in the case of propositional state
estimation, an agent can use logical inference with axioms of this kind to keep track of aspects
of the world that are not directly observed. Chapter 10 goes into more depth on the subject of
ﬁrst-order successor-state axioms and their uses for constructing plans.
8.4
KNOWLEDGE ENGINEERING IN FIRST-ORDER LOGIC
The preceding section illustrated the use of ﬁrst-order logic to represent knowledge in three
simple domains. This section describes the general process of knowledge-base construction—
a process called knowledge engineering. A knowledge engineer is someone who investigates
KNOWLEDGE
ENGINEERING
a particular domain, learns what concepts are important in that domain, and creates a formal
representation of the objects and relations in the domain. We illustrate the knowledge engi-
neering process in an electronic circuit domain that should already be fairly familiar, so that
we can concentrate on the representational issues involved. The approach we take is suitable
for developing special-purpose knowledge bases whose domain is carefully circumscribed
and whose range of queries is known in advance. General-purpose knowledge bases, which
cover a broad range of human knowledge and are intended to support tasks such as natural
language understanding, are discussed in Chapter 12.
8.4.1
The knowledge-engineering process
Knowledge engineering projects vary widely in content, scope, and difﬁculty, but all such
projects include the following steps:
1. Identify the task. The knowledge engineer must delineate the range of questions that
the knowledge base will support and the kinds of facts that will be available for each
speciﬁc problem instance. For example, does the wumpus knowledge base need to be
able to choose actions or is it required to answer questions only about the contents
of the environment? Will the sensor facts include the current location? The task will
determine what knowledge must be represented in order to connect problem instances to
answers. This step is analogous to the PEAS process for designing agents in Chapter 2.
2. Assemble the relevant knowledge. The knowledge engineer might already be an expert
in the domain, or might need to work with real experts to extract what they know—a
process called knowledge acquisition. At this stage, the knowledge is not represented
KNOWLEDGE
ACQUISITION
formally. The idea is to understand the scope of the knowledge base, as determined by
the task, and to understand how the domain actually works.
For the wumpus world, which is deﬁned by an artiﬁcial set of rules, the relevant
knowledge is easy to identify. (Notice, however, that the deﬁnition of adjacency was
not supplied explicitly in the wumpus-world rules.) For real domains, the issue of
relevance can be quite difﬁcult—for example, a system for simulating VLSI designs
might or might not need to take into account stray capacitances and skin effects.

308
Chapter
8.
First-Order Logic
3. Decide on a vocabulary of predicates, functions, and constants. That is, translate the
important domain-level concepts into logic-level names. This involves many questions
of knowledge-engineering style. Like programming style, this can have a signiﬁcant
impact on the eventual success of the project. For example, should pits be represented
by objects or by a unary predicate on squares? Should the agent’s orientation be a
function or a predicate? Should the wumpus’s location depend on time? Once the
choices have been made, the result is a vocabulary that is known as the ontology of
ONTOLOGY
the domain. The word ontology means a particular theory of the nature of being or
existence. The ontology determines what kinds of things exist, but does not determine
their speciﬁc properties and interrelationships.
4. Encode general knowledge about the domain. The knowledge engineer writes down
the axioms for all the vocabulary terms. This pins down (to the extent possible) the
meaning of the terms, enabling the expert to check the content. Often, this step reveals
misconceptions or gaps in the vocabulary that must be ﬁxed by returning to step 3 and
iterating through the process.
5. Encode a description of the speciﬁc problem instance. If the ontology is well thought
out, this step will be easy. It will involve writing simple atomic sentences about in-
stances of concepts that are already part of the ontology. For a logical agent, problem
instances are supplied by the sensors, whereas a “disembodied” knowledge base is sup-
plied with additional sentences in the same way that traditional programs are supplied
with input data.
6. Pose queries to the inference procedure and get answers. This is where the reward is:
we can let the inference procedure operate on the axioms and problem-speciﬁc facts to
derive the facts we are interested in knowing. Thus, we avoid the need for writing an
application-speciﬁc solution algorithm.
7. Debug the knowledge base. Alas, the answers to queries will seldom be correct on
the ﬁrst try. More precisely, the answers will be correct for the knowledge base as
written, assuming that the inference procedure is sound, but they will not be the ones
that the user is expecting. For example, if an axiom is missing, some queries will not be
answerable from the knowledge base. A considerable debugging process could ensue.
Missing axioms or axioms that are too weak can be easily identiﬁed by noticing places
where the chain of reasoning stops unexpectedly. For example, if the knowledge base
includes a diagnostic rule (see Exercise 8.13) for ﬁnding the wumpus,
∀s Smelly(s) ⇒Adjacent(Home(Wumpus), s) ,
instead of the biconditional, then the agent will never be able to prove the absence of
wumpuses. Incorrect axioms can be identiﬁed because they are false statements about
the world. For example, the sentence
∀x NumOfLegs(x, 4) ⇒Mammal(x)
is false for reptiles, amphibians, and, more importantly, tables. The falsehood of this
sentence can be determined independently of the rest of the knowledge base. In contrast,

Section 8.4.
Knowledge Engineering in First-Order Logic
309
a typical error in a program looks like this:
offset = position + 1 .
It is impossible to tell whether this statement is correct without looking at the rest of the
program to see whether, for example, offset is used to refer to the current position,
or to one beyond the current position, or whether the value of position is changed
by another statement and so offset should also be changed again.
To understand this seven-step process better, we now apply it to an extended example—the
domain of electronic circuits.
8.4.2
The electronic circuits domain
We will develop an ontology and knowledge base that allow us to reason about digital circuits
of the kind shown in Figure 8.6. We follow the seven-step process for knowledge engineering.
Identify the task
There are many reasoning tasks associated with digital circuits. At the highest level, one
analyzes the circuit’s functionality. For example, does the circuit in Figure 8.6 actually add
properly? If all the inputs are high, what is the output of gate A2? Questions about the
circuit’s structure are also interesting. For example, what are all the gates connected to the
ﬁrst input terminal? Does the circuit contain feedback loops? These will be our tasks in this
section. There are more detailed levels of analysis, including those related to timing delays,
circuit area, power consumption, production cost, and so on. Each of these levels would
require additional knowledge.
Assemble the relevant knowledge
What do we know about digital circuits? For our purposes, they are composed of wires and
gates. Signals ﬂow along wires to the input terminals of gates, and each gate produces a
1
2
3
1
2
X1
X2
A1
A2
O1
C1
Figure 8.6
A digital circuit C1, purporting to be a one-bit full adder. The ﬁrst two inputs
are the two bits to be added, and the third input is a carry bit. The ﬁrst output is the sum, and
the second output is a carry bit for the next adder. The circuit contains two XOR gates, two
AND gates, and one OR gate.

310
Chapter
8.
First-Order Logic
signal on the output terminal that ﬂows along another wire. To determine what these signals
will be, we need to know how the gates transform their input signals. There are four types
of gates: AND, OR, and XOR gates have two input terminals, and NOT gates have one. All
gates have one output terminal. Circuits, like gates, have input and output terminals.
To reason about functionality and connectivity, we do not need to talk about the wires
themselves, the paths they take, or the junctions where they come together. All that matters
is the connections between terminals—we can say that one output terminal is connected to
another input terminal without having to say what actually connects them. Other factors such
as the size, shape, color, or cost of the various components are irrelevant to our analysis.
If our purpose were something other than verifying designs at the gate level, the ontol-
ogy would be different. For example, if we were interested in debugging faulty circuits, then
it would probably be a good idea to include the wires in the ontology, because a faulty wire
can corrupt the signal ﬂowing along it. For resolving timing faults, we would need to include
gate delays. If we were interested in designing a product that would be proﬁtable, then the
cost of the circuit and its speed relative to other products on the market would be important.
Decide on a vocabulary
We now know that we want to talk about circuits, terminals, signals, and gates. The next step
is to choose functions, predicates, and constants to represent them. First, we need to be able
to distinguish gates from each other and from other objects. Each gate is represented as an
object named by a constant, about which we assert that it is a gate with, say, Gate(X1). The
behavior of each gate is determined by its type: one of the constants AND, OR, XOR, or
NOT. Because a gate has exactly one type, a function is appropriate: Type(X1) = XOR.
Circuits, like gates, are identiﬁed by a predicate: Circuit(C1).
Next we consider terminals, which are identiﬁed by the predicate Terminal(x). A gate
or circuit can have one or more input terminals and one or more output terminals. We use the
function In(1, X1) to denote the ﬁrst input terminal for gate X1. A similar function Out is
used for output terminals. The function Arity(c, i, j) says that circuit c has i input and j out-
put terminals. The connectivity between gates can be represented by a predicate, Connected,
which takes two terminals as arguments, as in Connected(Out(1, X1), In(1, X2)).
Finally, we need to know whether a signal is on or off. One possibility is to use a unary
predicate, On(t), which is true when the signal at a terminal is on. This makes it a little
difﬁcult, however, to pose questions such as “What are all the possible values of the signals
at the output terminals of circuit C1 ?” We therefore introduce as objects two signal values, 1
and 0, and a function Signal(t) that denotes the signal value for the terminal t.
Encode general knowledge of the domain
One sign that we have a good ontology is that we require only a few general rules, which can
be stated clearly and concisely. These are all the axioms we will need:
1. If two terminals are connected, then they have the same signal:
∀t1, t2 Terminal(t1) ∧Terminal(t2) ∧Connected(t1, t2) ⇒
Signal(t1) = Signal(t2) .

Section 8.4.
Knowledge Engineering in First-Order Logic
311
2. The signal at every terminal is either 1 or 0:
∀t Terminal(t) ⇒Signal(t) = 1 ∨Signal(t) = 0 .
3. Connected is commutative:
∀t1, t2 Connected(t1, t2) ⇔Connected(t2, t1) .
4. There are four types of gates:
∀g Gate(g) ∧k = Type(g) ⇒k = AND ∨k = OR ∨k = XOR ∨k = NOT .
5. An AND gate’s output is 0 if and only if any of its inputs is 0:
∀g Gate(g) ∧Type(g) = AND ⇒
Signal(Out(1, g)) = 0 ⇔∃n Signal(In(n, g)) = 0 .
6. An OR gate’s output is 1 if and only if any of its inputs is 1:
∀g Gate(g) ∧Type(g) = OR ⇒
Signal(Out(1, g)) = 1 ⇔∃n Signal(In(n, g)) = 1 .
7. An XOR gate’s output is 1 if and only if its inputs are different:
∀g Gate(g) ∧Type(g) = XOR ⇒
Signal(Out(1, g)) = 1 ⇔Signal(In(1, g))̸ = Signal(In(2, g)) .
8. A NOT gate’s output is different from its input:
∀g Gate(g) ∧(Type(g) = NOT) ⇒
Signal(Out(1, g))̸ = Signal(In(1, g)) .
9. The gates (except for NOT) have two inputs and one output.
∀g Gate(g) ∧Type(g) = NOT ⇒Arity(g, 1, 1) .
∀g Gate(g) ∧k = Type(g) ∧(k = AND ∨k = OR ∨k = XOR) ⇒
Arity(g, 2, 1)
10. A circuit has terminals, up to its input and output arity, and nothing beyond its arity:
∀c, i, j Circuit(c) ∧Arity(c, i, j) ⇒
∀n (n ≤i ⇒Terminal(In(c, n))) ∧(n > i ⇒In(c, n) = Nothing) ∧
∀n (n ≤j ⇒Terminal(Out(c, n))) ∧(n > j ⇒Out(c, n) = Nothing)
11. Gates, terminals, signals, gate types, and Nothing are all distinct.
∀g, t Gate(g) ∧Terminal(t) ⇒
g̸ = t̸ = 1̸ = 0̸ = OR̸ = AND̸ = XOR̸ = NOT̸ = Nothing .
12. Gates are circuits.
∀g Gate(g) ⇒Circuit(g)
Encode the speciﬁc problem instance
The circuit shown in Figure 8.6 is encoded as circuit C1 with the following description. First,
we categorize the circuit and its component gates:
Circuit(C1) ∧Arity(C1, 3, 2)
Gate(X1) ∧Type(X1) = XOR
Gate(X2) ∧Type(X2) = XOR
Gate(A1) ∧Type(A1) = AND
Gate(A2) ∧Type(A2) = AND
Gate(O1) ∧Type(O1) = OR .

312
Chapter
8.
First-Order Logic
Then, we show the connections between them:
Connected(Out(1, X1), In(1, X2))
Connected(In(1, C1), In(1, X1))
Connected(Out(1, X1), In(2, A2))
Connected(In(1, C1), In(1, A1))
Connected(Out(1, A2), In(1, O1))
Connected(In(2, C1), In(2, X1))
Connected(Out(1, A1), In(2, O1))
Connected(In(2, C1), In(2, A1))
Connected(Out(1, X2), Out(1, C1)) Connected(In(3, C1), In(2, X2))
Connected(Out(1, O1), Out(2, C1)) Connected(In(3, C1), In(1, A2)) .
Pose queries to the inference procedure
What combinations of inputs would cause the ﬁrst output of C1 (the sum bit) to be 0 and the
second output of C1 (the carry bit) to be 1?
∃i1, i2, i3 Signal(In(1, C1)) = i1 ∧Signal(In(2, C1)) = i2 ∧Signal(In(3, C1)) = i3
∧Signal(Out(1, C1)) = 0 ∧Signal(Out(2, C1)) = 1 .
The answers are substitutions for the variables i1, i2, and i3 such that the resulting sentence
is entailed by the knowledge base. ASKVARS will give us three such substitutions:
{i1/1, i2/1, i3/0}
{i1/1, i2/0, i3/1}
{i1/0, i2/1, i3/1} .
What are the possible sets of values of all the terminals for the adder circuit?
∃i1, i2, i3, o1, o2 Signal(In(1, C1)) = i1 ∧Signal(In(2, C1)) = i2
∧Signal(In(3, C1)) = i3 ∧Signal(Out(1, C1)) = o1 ∧Signal(Out(2, C1)) = o2 .
This ﬁnal query will return a complete input–output table for the device, which can be used
to check that it does in fact add its inputs correctly. This is a simple example of circuit
veriﬁcation. We can also use the deﬁnition of the circuit to build larger digital systems, for
CIRCUIT
VERIFICATION
which the same kind of veriﬁcation procedure can be carried out. (See Exercise 8.26.) Many
domains are amenable to the same kind of structured knowledge-base development, in which
more complex concepts are deﬁned on top of simpler concepts.
Debug the knowledge base
We can perturb the knowledge base in various ways to see what kinds of erroneous behaviors
emerge. For example, suppose we fail to read Section 8.2.8 and hence forget to assert that
1̸ = 0. Suddenly, the system will be unable to prove any outputs for the circuit, except for
the input cases 000 and 110. We can pinpoint the problem by asking for the outputs of each
gate. For example, we can ask
∃i1, i2, o Signal(In(1, C1)) = i1 ∧Signal(In(2, C1)) = i2 ∧Signal(Out(1, X1)) ,
which reveals that no outputs are known at X1 for the input cases 10 and 01. Then, we look
at the axiom for XOR gates, as applied to X1:
Signal(Out(1, X1)) = 1 ⇔Signal(In(1, X1))̸ = Signal(In(2, X1)) .
If the inputs are known to be, say, 1 and 0, then this reduces to
Signal(Out(1, X1)) = 1 ⇔1̸ = 0 .
Now the problem is apparent: the system is unable to infer that Signal(Out(1, X1)) = 1, so
we need to tell it that 1̸ = 0.

9
INFERENCE IN
FIRST-ORDER LOGIC
In which we deﬁne effective procedures for answering questions posed in ﬁrst-
order logic.
Chapter 7 showed how sound and complete inference can be achieved for propositional logic.
In this chapter, we extend those results to obtain algorithms that can answer any answer-
able question stated in ﬁrst-order logic. Section 9.1 introduces inference rules for quantiﬁers
and shows how to reduce ﬁrst-order inference to propositional inference, albeit at potentially
great expense. Section 9.2 describes the idea of uniﬁcation, showing how it can be used
to construct inference rules that work directly with ﬁrst-order sentences. We then discuss
three major families of ﬁrst-order inference algorithms. Forward chaining and its applica-
tions to deductive databases and production systems are covered in Section 9.3; backward
chaining and logic programming systems are developed in Section 9.4. Forward and back-
ward chaining can be very efﬁcient, but are applicable only to knowledge bases that can
be expressed as sets of Horn clauses. General ﬁrst-order sentences require resolution-based
theorem proving, which is described in Section 9.5.
9.1
PROPOSITIONAL VS. FIRST-ORDER INFERENCE
This section and the next introduce the ideas underlying modern logical inference systems.
We begin with some simple inference rules that can be applied to sentences with quantiﬁers
to obtain sentences without quantiﬁers. These rules lead naturally to the idea that ﬁrst-order
inference can be done by converting the knowledge base to propositional logic and using
propositional inference, which we already know how to do. The next section points out an
obvious shortcut, leading to inference methods that manipulate ﬁrst-order sentences directly.
9.1.1
Inference rules for quantiﬁers
Let us begin with universal quantiﬁers. Suppose our knowledge base contains the standard
folkloric axiom stating that all greedy kings are evil:
∀x King(x) ∧Greedy(x) ⇒Evil(x) .
322

Section 9.1.
Propositional vs. First-Order Inference
323
Then it seems quite permissible to infer any of the following sentences:
King(John) ∧Greedy(John) ⇒Evil(John)
King(Richard) ∧Greedy(Richard) ⇒Evil(Richard)
King(Father(John)) ∧Greedy(Father(John)) ⇒Evil(Father(John)) .
...
The rule of Universal Instantiation (UI for short) says that we can infer any sentence ob-
UNIVERSAL
INSTANTIATION
tained by substituting a ground term (a term without variables) for the variable.1 To write
GROUND TERM
out the inference rule formally, we use the notion of substitutions introduced in Section 8.3.
Let SUBST(θ, α) denote the result of applying the substitution θ to the sentence α. Then the
rule is written
∀v α
SUBST({v/g}, α)
for any variable v and ground term g. For example, the three sentences given earlier are
obtained with the substitutions {x/John}, {x/Richard}, and {x/Father(John)}.
In the rule for Existential Instantiation, the variable is replaced by a single new con-
EXISTENTIAL
INSTANTIATION
stant symbol. The formal statement is as follows: for any sentence α, variable v, and constant
symbol k that does not appear elsewhere in the knowledge base,
∃v α
SUBST({v/k}, α) .
For example, from the sentence
∃x Crown(x) ∧OnHead(x, John)
we can infer the sentence
Crown(C1) ∧OnHead(C1, John)
as long as C1 does not appear elsewhere in the knowledge base. Basically, the existential
sentence says there is some object satisfying a condition, and applying the existential instan-
tiation rule just gives a name to that object. Of course, that name must not already belong
to another object. Mathematics provides a nice example: suppose we discover that there is a
number that is a little bigger than 2.71828 and that satisﬁes the equation d(xy)/dy = xy for x.
We can give this number a name, such as e, but it would be a mistake to give it the name of
an existing object, such as π. In logic, the new name is called a Skolem constant. Existen-
SKOLEM CONSTANT
tial Instantiation is a special case of a more general process called skolemization, which we
cover in Section 9.5.
Whereas Universal Instantiation can be applied many times to produce many different
consequences, Existential Instantiation can be applied once, and then the existentially quan-
tiﬁed sentence can be discarded. For example, we no longer need ∃x Kill(x, Victim) once
we have added the sentence Kill(Murderer, Victim). Strictly speaking, the new knowledge
base is not logically equivalent to the old, but it can be shown to be inferentially equivalent
INFERENTIAL
EQUIVALENCE
in the sense that it is satisﬁable exactly when the original knowledge base is satisﬁable.
1 Do not confuse these substitutions with the extended interpretations used to deﬁne the semantics of quantiﬁers.
The substitution replaces a variable with a term (a piece of syntax) to produce a new sentence, whereas an
interpretation maps a variable to an object in the domain.

324
Chapter
9.
Inference in First-Order Logic
9.1.2
Reduction to propositional inference
Once we have rules for inferring nonquantiﬁed sentences from quantiﬁed sentences, it be-
comes possible to reduce ﬁrst-order inference to propositional inference. In this section we
give the main ideas; the details are given in Section 9.5.
The ﬁrst idea is that, just as an existentially quantiﬁed sentence can be replaced by
one instantiation, a universally quantiﬁed sentence can be replaced by the set of all possible
instantiations. For example, suppose our knowledge base contains just the sentences
∀x King(x) ∧Greedy(x) ⇒Evil(x)
King(John)
Greedy(John)
Brother(Richard, John) .
(9.1)
Then we apply UI to the ﬁrst sentence using all possible ground-term substitutions from the
vocabulary of the knowledge base—in this case, {x/John} and {x/Richard}. We obtain
King(John) ∧Greedy(John) ⇒Evil(John)
King(Richard) ∧Greedy(Richard) ⇒Evil(Richard) ,
and we discard the universally quantiﬁed sentence. Now, the knowledge base is essentially
propositional if we view the ground atomic sentences—King(John), Greedy(John), and
so on—as proposition symbols. Therefore, we can apply any of the complete propositional
algorithms in Chapter 7 to obtain conclusions such as Evil(John).
This technique of propositionalization can be made completely general, as we show
in Section 9.5; that is, every ﬁrst-order knowledge base and query can be propositionalized
in such a way that entailment is preserved. Thus, we have a complete decision procedure
for entailment . . . or perhaps not. There is a problem: when the knowledge base includes
a function symbol, the set of possible ground-term substitutions is inﬁnite! For example, if
the knowledge base mentions the Father symbol, then inﬁnitely many nested terms such as
Father(Father(Father(John))) can be constructed. Our propositional algorithms will have
difﬁculty with an inﬁnitely large set of sentences.
Fortunately, there is a famous theorem due to Jacques Herbrand (1930) to the effect
that if a sentence is entailed by the original, ﬁrst-order knowledge base, then there is a proof
involving just a ﬁnite subset of the propositionalized knowledge base. Since any such subset
has a maximum depth of nesting among its ground terms, we can ﬁnd the subset by ﬁrst
generating all the instantiations with constant symbols (Richard and John), then all terms of
depth 1 (Father(Richard) and Father(John)), then all terms of depth 2, and so on, until we
are able to construct a propositional proof of the entailed sentence.
We have sketched an approach to ﬁrst-order inference via propositionalization that is
complete—that is, any entailed sentence can be proved. This is a major achievement, given
that the space of possible models is inﬁnite. On the other hand, we do not know until the
proof is done that the sentence is entailed! What happens when the sentence is not entailed?
Can we tell? Well, for ﬁrst-order logic, it turns out that we cannot. Our proof procedure can
go on and on, generating more and more deeply nested terms, but we will not know whether
it is stuck in a hopeless loop or whether the proof is just about to pop out. This is very much

Section 9.2.
Uniﬁcation and Lifting
325
like the halting problem for Turing machines. Alan Turing (1936) and Alonzo Church (1936)
both proved, in rather different ways, the inevitability of this state of affairs. The question of
entailment for ﬁrst-order logic is semidecidable—that is, algorithms exist that say yes to every
entailed sentence, but no algorithm exists that also says no to every nonentailed sentence.
9.2
UNIFICATION AND LIFTING
The preceding section described the understanding of ﬁrst-order inference that existed up
to the early 1960s. The sharp-eyed reader (and certainly the computational logicians of the
early 1960s) will have noticed that the propositionalization approach is rather inefﬁcient. For
example, given the query Evil(x) and the knowledge base in Equation (9.1), it seems per-
verse to generate sentences such as King(Richard) ∧Greedy(Richard) ⇒Evil(Richard).
Indeed, the inference of Evil(John) from the sentences
∀x King(x) ∧Greedy(x) ⇒Evil(x)
King(John)
Greedy(John)
seems completely obvious to a human being. We now show how to make it completely
obvious to a computer.
9.2.1
A ﬁrst-order inference rule
The inference that John is evil—that is, that {x/John} solves the query Evil(x)—works like
this: to use the rule that greedy kings are evil, ﬁnd some x such that x is a king and x is
greedy, and then infer that this x is evil. More generally, if there is some substitution θ that
makes each of the conjuncts of the premise of the implication identical to sentences already
in the knowledge base, then we can assert the conclusion of the implication, after applying θ.
In this case, the substitution θ = {x/John} achieves that aim.
We can actually make the inference step do even more work. Suppose that instead of
knowing Greedy(John), we know that everyone is greedy:
∀y Greedy(y) .
(9.2)
Then we would still like to be able to conclude that Evil(John), because we know that
John is a king (given) and John is greedy (because everyone is greedy). What we need for
this to work is to ﬁnd a substitution both for the variables in the implication sentence and
for the variables in the sentences that are in the knowledge base. In this case, applying the
substitution {x/John, y/John} to the implication premises King(x) and Greedy(x) and the
knowledge-base sentences King(John) and Greedy(y) will make them identical. Thus, we
can infer the conclusion of the implication.
This inference process can be captured as a single inference rule that we call Gener-
alized Modus Ponens:2 For atomic sentences pi, pi′, and q, where there is a substitution θ
GENERALIZED
MODUS PONENS

326
Chapter
9.
Inference in First-Order Logic
such that SUBST(θ, pi′) = SUBST(θ, pi), for all i,
p1′, p2′, . . . , pn′, (p1 ∧p2 ∧. . . ∧pn ⇒q)
SUBST(θ, q)
.
There are n+1 premises to this rule: the n atomic sentences pi′ and the one implication. The
conclusion is the result of applying the substitution θ to the consequent q. For our example:
p1′ is King(John)
p1 is King(x)
p2′ is Greedy(y)
p2 is Greedy(x)
θ is {x/John, y/John}
q is Evil(x)
SUBST(θ, q) is Evil(John) .
It is easy to show that Generalized Modus Ponens is a sound inference rule. First, we observe
that, for any sentence p (whose variables are assumed to be universally quantiﬁed) and for
any substitution θ,
p |= SUBST(θ, p)
holds by Universal Instantiation. It holds in particular for a θ that satisﬁes the conditions of
the Generalized Modus Ponens rule. Thus, from p1′, . . . , pn′ we can infer
SUBST(θ, p1′) ∧. . . ∧SUBST(θ, pn′)
and from the implication p1 ∧. . . ∧pn ⇒q we can infer
SUBST(θ, p1) ∧. . . ∧SUBST(θ, pn) ⇒SUBST(θ, q) .
Now, θ in Generalized Modus Ponens is deﬁned so that SUBST(θ, pi′) = SUBST(θ, pi), for
all i; therefore the ﬁrst of these two sentences matches the premise of the second exactly.
Hence, SUBST(θ, q) follows by Modus Ponens.
Generalized Modus Ponens is a lifted version of Modus Ponens—it raises Modus Po-
LIFTING
nens from ground (variable-free) propositional logic to ﬁrst-order logic. We will see in the
rest of this chapter that we can develop lifted versions of the forward chaining, backward
chaining, and resolution algorithms introduced in Chapter 7. The key advantage of lifted
inference rules over propositionalization is that they make only those substitutions that are
required to allow particular inferences to proceed.
9.2.2
Uniﬁcation
Lifted inference rules require ﬁnding substitutions that make different logical expressions
look identical. This process is called uniﬁcation and is a key component of all ﬁrst-order
UNIFICATION
inference algorithms. The UNIFY algorithm takes two sentences and returns a uniﬁer for
UNIFIER
them if one exists:
UNIFY(p, q) = θ where SUBST(θ, p) = SUBST(θ, q) .
Let us look at some examples of how UNIFY should behave. Suppose we have a query
AskVars(Knows(John, x)): whom does John know? Answers to this query can be found
2 Generalized Modus Ponens is more general than Modus Ponens (page 249) in the sense that the known facts
and the premise of the implication need match only up to a substitution, rather than exactly. On the other hand,
Modus Ponens allows any sentence α as the premise, rather than just a conjunction of atomic sentences.

Section 9.2.
Uniﬁcation and Lifting
327
by ﬁnding all sentences in the knowledge base that unify with Knows(John, x). Here are the
results of uniﬁcation with four different sentences that might be in the knowledge base:
UNIFY(Knows(John, x), Knows(John, Jane)) = {x/Jane}
UNIFY(Knows(John, x), Knows(y, Bill)) = {x/Bill, y/John}
UNIFY(Knows(John, x), Knows(y, Mother(y))) = {y/John, x/Mother(John)}
UNIFY(Knows(John, x), Knows(x, Elizabeth)) = fail .
The last uniﬁcation fails because x cannot take on the values John and Elizabeth at the
same time. Now, remember that Knows(x, Elizabeth) means “Everyone knows Elizabeth,”
so we should be able to infer that John knows Elizabeth. The problem arises only because
the two sentences happen to use the same variable name, x. The problem can be avoided
by standardizing apart one of the two sentences being uniﬁed, which means renaming its
STANDARDIZING
APART
variables to avoid name clashes. For example, we can rename x in Knows(x, Elizabeth) to
x17 (a new variable name) without changing its meaning. Now the uniﬁcation will work:
UNIFY(Knows(John, x), Knows(x17, Elizabeth)) = {x/Elizabeth, x17/John} .
Exercise 9.12 delves further into the need for standardizing apart.
There is one more complication: we said that UNIFY should return a substitution
that makes the two arguments look the same. But there could be more than one such uni-
ﬁer. For example, UNIFY(Knows(John, x), Knows(y, z)) could return {y/John, x/z} or
{y/John, x/John, z/John}. The ﬁrst uniﬁer gives Knows(John, z) as the result of uniﬁ-
cation, whereas the second gives Knows(John, John). The second result could be obtained
from the ﬁrst by an additional substitution {z/John}; we say that the ﬁrst uniﬁer is more
general than the second, because it places fewer restrictions on the values of the variables. It
turns out that, for every uniﬁable pair of expressions, there is a single most general uniﬁer (or
MOST GENERAL
UNIFIER
MGU) that is unique up to renaming and substitution of variables. (For example, {x/John}
and {y/John} are considered equivalent, as are {x/John, y/John} and {x/John, y/x}.) In
this case it is {y/John, x/z}.
An algorithm for computing most general uniﬁers is shown in Figure 9.1. The process
is simple: recursively explore the two expressions simultaneously “side by side,” building up
a uniﬁer along the way, but failing if two corresponding points in the structures do not match.
There is one expensive step: when matching a variable against a complex term, one must
check whether the variable itself occurs inside the term; if it does, the match fails because no
consistent uniﬁer can be constructed. For example, S(x) can’t unify with S(S(x)). This so-
called occur check makes the complexity of the entire algorithm quadratic in the size of the
OCCUR CHECK
expressions being uniﬁed. Some systems, including all logic programming systems, simply
omit the occur check and sometimes make unsound inferences as a result; other systems use
more complex algorithms with linear-time complexity.
9.2.3
Storage and retrieval
Underlying the TELL and ASK functions used to inform and interrogate a knowledge base
are the more primitive STORE and FETCH functions. STORE(s) stores a sentence s into the
knowledge base and FETCH(q) returns all uniﬁers such that the query q uniﬁes with some

328
Chapter
9.
Inference in First-Order Logic
function UNIFY(x,y,θ) returns a substitution to make x and y identical
inputs: x, a variable, constant, list, or compound expression
y, a variable, constant, list, or compound expression
θ, the substitution built up so far (optional, defaults to empty)
if θ = failure then return failure
else if x = y then return θ
else if VARIABLE?(x) then return UNIFY-VAR(x,y,θ)
else if VARIABLE?(y) then return UNIFY-VAR(y,x,θ)
else if COMPOUND?(x) and COMPOUND?(y) then
return UNIFY(x.ARGS,y.ARGS, UNIFY(x.OP,y.OP,θ))
else if LIST?(x) and LIST?(y) then
return UNIFY(x.REST,y.REST, UNIFY(x.FIRST,y.FIRST,θ))
else return failure
function UNIFY-VAR(var,x,θ) returns a substitution
if {var/val} ∈θ then return UNIFY(val,x,θ)
else if {x/val} ∈θ then return UNIFY(var,val,θ)
else if OCCUR-CHECK?(var,x) then return failure
else return add {var/x} to θ
Figure 9.1
The uniﬁcation algorithm. The algorithm works by comparing the structures
of the inputs, element by element. The substitution θ that is the argument to UNIFY is built
up along the way and is used to make sure that later comparisons are consistent with bindings
that were established earlier. In a compound expression such as F(A, B), the OP ﬁeld picks
out the function symbol F and the ARGS ﬁeld picks out the argument list (A, B).
sentence in the knowledge base. The problem we used to illustrate uniﬁcation—ﬁnding all
facts that unify with Knows(John, x)—is an instance of FETCHing.
The simplest way to implement STORE and FETCH is to keep all the facts in one long
list and unify each query against every element of the list. Such a process is inefﬁcient, but
it works, and it’s all you need to understand the rest of the chapter. The remainder of this
section outlines ways to make retrieval more efﬁcient; it can be skipped on ﬁrst reading.
We can make FETCH more efﬁcient by ensuring that uniﬁcations are attempted only
with sentences that have some chance of unifying. For example, there is no point in trying
to unify Knows(John, x) with Brother(Richard, John). We can avoid such uniﬁcations by
indexing the facts in the knowledge base. A simple scheme called predicate indexing puts
INDEXING
PREDICATE
INDEXING
all the Knows facts in one bucket and all the Brother facts in another. The buckets can be
stored in a hash table for efﬁcient access.
Predicate indexing is useful when there are many predicate symbols but only a few
clauses for each symbol. Sometimes, however, a predicate has many clauses. For example,
suppose that the tax authorities want to keep track of who employs whom, using a predi-
cate Employs(x, y). This would be a very large bucket with perhaps millions of employers

Section 9.2.
Uniﬁcation and Lifting
329
Employs(x,y)
Employs(x,Richard)
Employs(IBM,y)
Employs(IBM,Richard)
Employs(x,y)
Employs(John,John)
Employs(x,x)
Employs(x,John)
Employs(John,y)
(a)
(b)
Figure 9.2
(a) The subsumption lattice whose lowest node is Employs(IBM , Richard).
(b) The subsumption lattice for the sentence Employs(John, John).
and tens of millions of employees. Answering a query such as Employs(x, Richard) with
predicate indexing would require scanning the entire bucket.
For this particular query, it would help if facts were indexed both by predicate and by
second argument, perhaps using a combined hash table key. Then we could simply construct
the key from the query and retrieve exactly those facts that unify with the query. For other
queries, such as Employs(IBM , y), we would need to have indexed the facts by combining
the predicate with the ﬁrst argument. Therefore, facts can be stored under multiple index
keys, rendering them instantly accessible to various queries that they might unify with.
Given a sentence to be stored, it is possible to construct indices for all possible queries
that unify with it. For the fact Employs(IBM , Richard), the queries are
Employs(IBM , Richard)
Does IBM employ Richard?
Employs(x, Richard)
Who employs Richard?
Employs(IBM , y)
Whom does IBM employ?
Employs(x, y)
Who employs whom?
These queries form a subsumption lattice, as shown in Figure 9.2(a). The lattice has some
SUBSUMPTION
LATTICE
interesting properties. For example, the child of any node in the lattice is obtained from its
parent by a single substitution; and the “highest” common descendant of any two nodes is
the result of applying their most general uniﬁer. The portion of the lattice above any ground
fact can be constructed systematically (Exercise 9.5). A sentence with repeated constants has
a slightly different lattice, as shown in Figure 9.2(b). Function symbols and variables in the
sentences to be stored introduce still more interesting lattice structures.
The scheme we have described works very well whenever the lattice contains a small
number of nodes. For a predicate with n arguments, however, the lattice contains O(2n)
nodes. If function symbols are allowed, the number of nodes is also exponential in the size
of the terms in the sentence to be stored. This can lead to a huge number of indices. At some
point, the beneﬁts of indexing are outweighed by the costs of storing and maintaining all
the indices. We can respond by adopting a ﬁxed policy, such as maintaining indices only on
keys composed of a predicate plus each argument, or by using an adaptive policy that creates
indices to meet the demands of the kinds of queries being asked. For most AI systems, the
number of facts to be stored is small enough that efﬁcient indexing is considered a solved
problem. For commercial databases, where facts number in the billions, the problem has
been the subject of intensive study and technology development..

330
Chapter
9.
Inference in First-Order Logic
9.3
FORWARD CHAINING
A forward-chaining algorithm for propositional deﬁnite clauses was given in Section 7.5.
The idea is simple: start with the atomic sentences in the knowledge base and apply Modus
Ponens in the forward direction, adding new atomic sentences, until no further inferences
can be made. Here, we explain how the algorithm is applied to ﬁrst-order deﬁnite clauses.
Deﬁnite clauses such as Situation ⇒Response are especially useful for systems that make
inferences in response to newly arrived information. Many systems can be deﬁned this way,
and forward chaining can be implemented very efﬁciently.
9.3.1
First-order deﬁnite clauses
First-order deﬁnite clauses closely resemble propositional deﬁnite clauses (page 256): they
are disjunctions of literals of which exactly one is positive. A deﬁnite clause either is atomic
or is an implication whose antecedent is a conjunction of positive literals and whose conse-
quent is a single positive literal. The following are ﬁrst-order deﬁnite clauses:
King(x) ∧Greedy(x) ⇒Evil(x) .
King(John) .
Greedy(y) .
Unlike propositional literals, ﬁrst-order literals can include variables, in which case those
variables are assumed to be universally quantiﬁed. (Typically, we omit universal quantiﬁers
when writing deﬁnite clauses.) Not every knowledge base can be converted into a set of
deﬁnite clauses because of the single-positive-literal restriction, but many can. Consider the
following problem:
The law says that it is a crime for an American to sell weapons to hostile nations. The
country Nono, an enemy of America, has some missiles, and all of its missiles were sold
to it by Colonel West, who is American.
We will prove that West is a criminal. First, we will represent these facts as ﬁrst-order deﬁnite
clauses. The next section shows how the forward-chaining algorithm solves the problem.
“. . . it is a crime for an American to sell weapons to hostile nations”:
American(x) ∧Weapon(y) ∧Sells(x, y, z) ∧Hostile(z) ⇒Criminal(x) .
(9.3)
“Nono . . . has some missiles.” The sentence ∃x Owns(Nono, x)∧Missile(x) is transformed
into two deﬁnite clauses by Existential Instantiation, introducing a new constant M1:
Owns(Nono, M1)
(9.4)
Missile(M1)
.
(9.5)
“All of its missiles were sold to it by Colonel West”:
Missile(x) ∧Owns(Nono, x) ⇒Sells(West, x, Nono) .
(9.6)
We will also need to know that missiles are weapons:
Missile(x) ⇒Weapon(x)
(9.7)

Section 9.3.
Forward Chaining
331
and we must know that an enemy of America counts as “hostile”:
Enemy(x, America) ⇒Hostile(x) .
(9.8)
“West, who is American . . .”:
American(West) .
(9.9)
“The country Nono, an enemy of America . . .”:
Enemy(Nono, America) .
(9.10)
This knowledge base contains no function symbols and is therefore an instance of the class
of Datalog knowledge bases. Datalog is a language that is restricted to ﬁrst-order deﬁnite
DATALOG
clauses with no function symbols. Datalog gets its name because it can represent the type of
statements typically made in relational databases. We will see that the absence of function
symbols makes inference much easier.
9.3.2
A simple forward-chaining algorithm
The ﬁrst forward-chaining algorithm we consider is a simple one, shown in Figure 9.3. Start-
ing from the known facts, it triggers all the rules whose premises are satisﬁed, adding their
conclusions to the known facts. The process repeats until the query is answered (assuming
that just one answer is required) or no new facts are added. Notice that a fact is not “new”
if it is just a renaming of a known fact. One sentence is a renaming of another if they
RENAMING
are identical except for the names of the variables. For example, Likes(x, IceCream) and
Likes(y, IceCream) are renamings of each other because they differ only in the choice of x
or y; their meanings are identical: everyone likes ice cream.
We use our crime problem to illustrate how FOL-FC-ASK works. The implication
sentences are (9.3), (9.6), (9.7), and (9.8). Two iterations are required:
• On the ﬁrst iteration, rule (9.3) has unsatisﬁed premises.
Rule (9.6) is satisﬁed with {x/M1}, and Sells(West, M1, Nono) is added.
Rule (9.7) is satisﬁed with {x/M1}, and Weapon(M1) is added.
Rule (9.8) is satisﬁed with {x/Nono}, and Hostile(Nono) is added.
• On the second iteration, rule (9.3) is satisﬁed with {x/West, y/M1, z/Nono}, and
Criminal(West) is added.
Figure 9.4 shows the proof tree that is generated. Notice that no new inferences are possible
at this point because every sentence that could be concluded by forward chaining is already
contained explicitly in the KB. Such a knowledge base is called a ﬁxed point of the inference
process. Fixed points reached by forward chaining with ﬁrst-order deﬁnite clauses are similar
to those for propositional forward chaining (page 258); the principal difference is that a ﬁrst-
order ﬁxed point can include universally quantiﬁed atomic sentences.
FOL-FC-ASK is easy to analyze. First, it is sound, because every inference is just an
application of Generalized Modus Ponens, which is sound. Second, it is complete for deﬁnite
clause knowledge bases; that is, it answers every query whose answers are entailed by any
knowledge base of deﬁnite clauses. For Datalog knowledge bases, which contain no function
symbols, the proof of completeness is fairly easy. We begin by counting the number of

332
Chapter
9.
Inference in First-Order Logic
function FOL-FC-ASK(KB,α) returns a substitution or false
inputs: KB, the knowledge base, a set of ﬁrst-order deﬁnite clauses
α, the query, an atomic sentence
local variables: new, the new sentences inferred on each iteration
repeat until new is empty
new ←{ }
for each rule in KB do
(p1 ∧. . . ∧pn ⇒q) ←STANDARDIZE-VARIABLES(rule)
for each θ such that SUBST(θ,p1 ∧. . . ∧pn) = SUBST(θ,p′
1 ∧. . . ∧p′
n)
for some p′
1, . . . , p′
n in KB
q′ ←SUBST(θ,q)
if q′ does not unify with some sentence already in KB or new then
add q′ to new
φ ←UNIFY(q′,α)
if φ is not fail then return φ
add new to KB
return false
Figure 9.3
A conceptually straightforward, but very inefﬁcient, forward-chaining algo-
rithm. On each iteration, it adds to KB all the atomic sentences that can be inferred in one
step from the implication sentences and the atomic sentences already in KB. The function
STANDARDIZE-VARIABLES replaces all variables in its arguments with new ones that have
not been used before.
Hostile(Nono)
Enemy(Nono,America)
Owns(Nono,M1)
Missile(M1)
American(West)
Weapon(M1)
Criminal(West)
Sells(West,M1,Nono)
Figure 9.4
The proof tree generated by forward chaining on the crime example. The initial
facts appear at the bottom level, facts inferred on the ﬁrst iteration in the middle level, and
facts inferred on the second iteration at the top level.
possible facts that can be added, which determines the maximum number of iterations. Let k
be the maximum arity (number of arguments) of any predicate, p be the number of predicates,
and n be the number of constant symbols. Clearly, there can be no more than pnk distinct
ground facts, so after this many iterations the algorithm must have reached a ﬁxed point. Then
we can make an argument very similar to the proof of completeness for propositional forward

Section 9.3.
Forward Chaining
333
chaining. (See page 258.) The details of how to make the transition from propositional to
ﬁrst-order completeness are given for the resolution algorithm in Section 9.5.
For general deﬁnite clauses with function symbols, FOL-FC-ASK can generate in-
ﬁnitely many new facts, so we need to be more careful. For the case in which an answer to
the query sentence q is entailed, we must appeal to Herbrand’s theorem to establish that the
algorithm will ﬁnd a proof. (See Section 9.5 for the resolution case.) If the query has no
answer, the algorithm could fail to terminate in some cases. For example, if the knowledge
base includes the Peano axioms
NatNum(0)
∀n NatNum(n) ⇒NatNum(S(n)) ,
then forward chaining adds NatNum(S(0)), NatNum(S(S(0))), NatNum(S(S(S(0)))),
and so on. This problem is unavoidable in general. As with general ﬁrst-order logic, entail-
ment with deﬁnite clauses is semidecidable.
9.3.3
Efﬁcient forward chaining
The forward-chaining algorithm in Figure 9.3 is designed for ease of understanding rather
than for efﬁciency of operation. There are three possible sources of inefﬁciency. First, the
“inner loop” of the algorithm involves ﬁnding all possible uniﬁers such that the premise of
a rule uniﬁes with a suitable set of facts in the knowledge base. This is often called pattern
matching and can be very expensive. Second, the algorithm rechecks every rule on every
PATTERN MATCHING
iteration to see whether its premises are satisﬁed, even if very few additions are made to the
knowledge base on each iteration. Finally, the algorithm might generate many facts that are
irrelevant to the goal. We address each of these issues in turn.
Matching rules against known facts
The problem of matching the premise of a rule against the facts in the knowledge base might
seem simple enough. For example, suppose we want to apply the rule
Missile(x) ⇒Weapon(x) .
Then we need to ﬁnd all the facts that unify with Missile(x); in a suitably indexed knowledge
base, this can be done in constant time per fact. Now consider a rule such as
Missile(x) ∧Owns(Nono, x) ⇒Sells(West, x, Nono) .
Again, we can ﬁnd all the objects owned by Nono in constant time per object; then, for each
object, we could check whether it is a missile. If the knowledge base contains many objects
owned by Nono and very few missiles, however, it would be better to ﬁnd all the missiles ﬁrst
and then check whether they are owned by Nono. This is the conjunct ordering problem:
CONJUNCT
ORDERING
ﬁnd an ordering to solve the conjuncts of the rule premise so that the total cost is minimized.
It turns out that ﬁnding the optimal ordering is NP-hard, but good heuristics are available.
For example, the minimum-remaining-values (MRV) heuristic used for CSPs in Chapter 6
would suggest ordering the conjuncts to look for missiles ﬁrst if fewer missiles than objects
are owned by Nono.

334
Chapter
9.
Inference in First-Order Logic
WA
NT
SA
Q
NSW
V
T
Diﬀ(wa, nt) ∧Diﬀ(wa, sa) ∧
Diﬀ(nt, q) ∧Diﬀ(nt, sa) ∧
Diﬀ(q, nsw) ∧Diﬀ(q, sa) ∧
Diﬀ(nsw, v) ∧Diﬀ(nsw, sa) ∧
Diﬀ(v, sa) ⇒Colorable()
Diﬀ(Red, Blue)
Diﬀ(Red, Green)
Diﬀ(Green, Red) Diﬀ(Green, Blue)
Diﬀ(Blue, Red)
Diﬀ(Blue, Green)
(a)
(b)
Figure 9.5
(a) Constraint graph for coloring the map of Australia. (b) The map-coloring
CSP expressed as a single deﬁnite clause. Each map region is represented as a variable whose
value can be one of the constants Red, Green or Blue.
The connection between pattern matching and constraint satisfaction is actually very
close. We can view each conjunct as a constraint on the variables that it contains—for ex-
ample, Missile(x) is a unary constraint on x. Extending this idea, we can express every
ﬁnite-domain CSP as a single deﬁnite clause together with some associated ground facts.
Consider the map-coloring problem from Figure 6.1, shown again in Figure 9.5(a). An equiv-
alent formulation as a single deﬁnite clause is given in Figure 9.5(b). Clearly, the conclusion
Colorable() can be inferred only if the CSP has a solution. Because CSPs in general include
3-SAT problems as special cases, we can conclude that matching a deﬁnite clause against a
set of facts is NP-hard.
It might seem rather depressing that forward chaining has an NP-hard matching problem
in its inner loop. There are three ways to cheer ourselves up:
• We can remind ourselves that most rules in real-world knowledge bases are small and
simple (like the rules in our crime example) rather than large and complex (like the
CSP formulation in Figure 9.5). It is common in the database world to assume that
both the sizes of rules and the arities of predicates are bounded by a constant and to
worry only about data complexity—that is, the complexity of inference as a function
DATA COMPLEXITY
of the number of ground facts in the knowledge base. It is easy to show that the data
complexity of forward chaining is polynomial.
• We can consider subclasses of rules for which matching is efﬁcient. Essentially every
Datalog clause can be viewed as deﬁning a CSP, so matching will be tractable just
when the corresponding CSP is tractable. Chapter 6 describes several tractable families
of CSPs. For example, if the constraint graph (the graph whose nodes are variables
and whose links are constraints) forms a tree, then the CSP can be solved in linear
time. Exactly the same result holds for rule matching. For instance, if we remove South

Section 9.3.
Forward Chaining
335
Australia from the map in Figure 9.5, the resulting clause is
Diﬀ(wa, nt) ∧Diﬀ(nt, q) ∧Diﬀ(q, nsw) ∧Diﬀ(nsw, v) ⇒Colorable()
which corresponds to the reduced CSP shown in Figure 6.12 on page 224. Algorithms
for solving tree-structured CSPs can be applied directly to the problem of rule matching.
• We can try to to eliminate redundant rule-matching attempts in the forward-chaining
algorithm, as described next.
Incremental forward chaining
When we showed how forward chaining works on the crime example, we cheated; in partic-
ular, we omitted some of the rule matching done by the algorithm shown in Figure 9.3. For
example, on the second iteration, the rule
Missile(x) ⇒Weapon(x)
matches against Missile(M1) (again), and of course the conclusion Weapon(M1) is already
known so nothing happens. Such redundant rule matching can be avoided if we make the
following observation: Every new fact inferred on iteration t must be derived from at least
one new fact inferred on iteration t −1.
This is true because any inference that does not
require a new fact from iteration t −1 could have been done at iteration t −1 already.
This observation leads naturally to an incremental forward-chaining algorithm where,
at iteration t, we check a rule only if its premise includes a conjunct pi that uniﬁes with a fact
p′
i newly inferred at iteration t −1. The rule-matching step then ﬁxes pi to match with p′
i, but
allows the other conjuncts of the rule to match with facts from any previous iteration. This
algorithm generates exactly the same facts at each iteration as the algorithm in Figure 9.3, but
is much more efﬁcient.
With suitable indexing, it is easy to identify all the rules that can be triggered by any
given fact, and indeed many real systems operate in an “update” mode wherein forward chain-
ing occurs in response to each new fact that is TELLed to the system. Inferences cascade
through the set of rules until the ﬁxed point is reached, and then the process begins again for
the next new fact.
Typically, only a small fraction of the rules in the knowledge base are actually triggered
by the addition of a given fact. This means that a great deal of redundant work is done in
repeatedly constructing partial matches that have some unsatisﬁed premises. Our crime ex-
ample is rather too small to show this effectively, but notice that a partial match is constructed
on the ﬁrst iteration between the rule
American(x) ∧Weapon(y) ∧Sells(x, y, z) ∧Hostile(z) ⇒Criminal(x)
and the fact American(West). This partial match is then discarded and rebuilt on the second
iteration (when the rule succeeds). It would be better to retain and gradually complete the
partial matches as new facts arrive, rather than discarding them.
The rete algorithm3 was the ﬁrst to address this problem. The algorithm preprocesses
RETE
the set of rules in the knowledge base to construct a sort of dataﬂow network in which each
3 Rete is Latin for net. The English pronunciation rhymes with treaty.

336
Chapter
9.
Inference in First-Order Logic
node is a literal from a rule premise. Variable bindings ﬂow through the network and are
ﬁltered out when they fail to match a literal. If two literals in a rule share a variable—for
example, Sells(x, y, z) ∧Hostile(z) in the crime example—then the bindings from each
literal are ﬁltered through an equality node. A variable binding reaching a node for an n-
ary literal such as Sells(x, y, z) might have to wait for bindings for the other variables to be
established before the process can continue. At any given point, the state of a rete network
captures all the partial matches of the rules, avoiding a great deal of recomputation.
Rete networks, and various improvements thereon, have been a key component of so-
called production systems, which were among the earliest forward-chaining systems in
PRODUCTION
SYSTEM
widespread use.4 The XCON system (originally called R1; McDermott, 1982) was built
with a production-system architecture. XCON contained several thousand rules for designing
conﬁgurations of computer components for customers of the Digital Equipment Corporation.
It was one of the ﬁrst clear commercial successes in the emerging ﬁeld of expert systems.
Many other similar systems have been built with the same underlying technology, which has
been implemented in the general-purpose language OPS-5.
Production systems are also popular in cognitive architectures—that is, models of hu-
COGNITIVE
ARCHITECTURES
man reasoning—such as ACT (Anderson, 1983) and SOAR (Laird et al., 1987). In such sys-
tems, the “working memory” of the system models human short-term memory, and the pro-
ductions are part of long-term memory. On each cycle of operation, productions are matched
against the working memory of facts. A production whose conditions are satisﬁed can add or
delete facts in working memory. In contrast to the typical situation in databases, production
systems often have many rules and relatively few facts. With suitably optimized matching
technology, some modern systems can operate in real time with tens of millions of rules.
Irrelevant facts
The ﬁnal source of inefﬁciency in forward chaining appears to be intrinsic to the approach
and also arises in the propositional context. Forward chaining makes all allowable inferences
based on the known facts, even if they are irrelevant to the goal at hand. In our crime example,
there were no rules capable of drawing irrelevant conclusions, so the lack of directedness was
not a problem. In other cases (e.g., if many rules describe the eating habits of Americans and
the prices of missiles), FOL-FC-ASK will generate many irrelevant conclusions.
One way to avoid drawing irrelevant conclusions is to use backward chaining, as de-
scribed in Section 9.4. Another solution is to restrict forward chaining to a selected subset of
rules, as in PL-FC-ENTAILS? (page 258). A third approach has emerged in the ﬁeld of de-
ductive databases, which are large-scale databases, like relational databases, but which use
DEDUCTIVE
DATABASES
forward chaining as the standard inference tool rather than SQL queries. The idea is to rewrite
the rule set, using information from the goal, so that only relevant variable bindings—those
belonging to a so-called magic set—are considered during forward inference. For example, if
MAGIC SET
the goal is Criminal(West), the rule that concludes Criminal(x) will be rewritten to include
an extra conjunct that constrains the value of x:
Magic(x) ∧American(x) ∧Weapon(y) ∧Sells(x, y, z) ∧Hostile(z) ⇒Criminal(x) .
4 The word production in production systems denotes a condition–action rule.

Section 9.4.
Backward Chaining
337
The fact Magic(West) is also added to the KB. In this way, even if the knowledge base
contains facts about millions of Americans, only Colonel West will be considered during the
forward inference process. The complete process for deﬁning magic sets and rewriting the
knowledge base is too complex to go into here, but the basic idea is to perform a sort of
“generic” backward inference from the goal in order to work out which variable bindings
need to be constrained. The magic sets approach can therefore be thought of as a kind of
hybrid between forward inference and backward preprocessing.
9.4
BACKWARD CHAINING
The second major family of logical inference algorithms uses the backward chaining ap-
proach introduced in Section 7.5 for deﬁnite clauses. These algorithms work backward from
the goal, chaining through rules to ﬁnd known facts that support the proof. We describe
the basic algorithm, and then we describe how it is used in logic programming, which is the
most widely used form of automated reasoning. We also see that backward chaining has some
disadvantages compared with forward chaining, and we look at ways to overcome them. Fi-
nally, we look at the close connection between logic programming and constraint satisfaction
problems.
9.4.1
A backward-chaining algorithm
Figure 9.6 shows a backward-chaining algorithm for deﬁnite clauses. FOL-BC-ASK(KB,
goal) will be proved if the knowledge base contains a clause of the form lhs ⇒goal, where
lhs (left-hand side) is a list of conjuncts. An atomic fact like American(West) is considered
as a clause whose lhs is the empty list. Now a query that contains variables might be proved
in multiple ways. For example, the query Person(x) could be proved with the substitution
{x/John} as well as with {x/Richard}. So we implement FOL-BC-ASK as a generator—
GENERATOR
a function that returns multiple times, each time giving one possible result.
Backward chaining is a kind of AND/OR search—the OR part because the goal query
can be proved by any rule in the knowledge base, and the AND part because all the conjuncts
in the lhs of a clause must be proved. FOL-BC-OR works by fetching all clauses that might
unify with the goal, standardizing the variables in the clause to be brand-new variables, and
then, if the rhs of the clause does indeed unify with the goal, proving every conjunct in the
lhs, using FOL-BC-AND. That function in turn works by proving each of the conjuncts in
turn, keeping track of the accumulated substitution as we go. Figure 9.7 is the proof tree for
deriving Criminal(West) from sentences (9.3) through (9.10).
Backward chaining, as we have written it, is clearly a depth-ﬁrst search algorithm.
This means that its space requirements are linear in the size of the proof (neglecting, for
now, the space required to accumulate the solutions). It also means that backward chaining
(unlike forward chaining) suffers from problems with repeated states and incompleteness. We
will discuss these problems and some potential solutions, but ﬁrst we show how backward
chaining is used in logic programming systems.
