3.1
WHAT IS AGILITY?
Just what is agility in the context of software engineering work? Ivar Jacobson
[Jac02a] provides a useful discussion:
Agility has become today’s buzzword when describing a modern software process. Every-
one is agile. An agile team is a nimble team able to appropriately respond to changes.
Change is what software development is very much about. Changes in the software be-
ing built, changes to the team members, changes because of new technology, changes of
all kinds that may have an impact on the product they build or the project that creates the
product. Support for changes should be built-in everything we do in software, something
we embrace because it is the heart and soul of software. An agile team recognizes that
software is developed by individuals working in teams and that the skills of these people,
their ability to collaborate is at the core for the success of the project.
In Jacobson’s view, the pervasiveness of change is the primary driver for agility. Soft-
ware engineers must be quick on their feet if they are to accommodate the rapid
changes that Jacobson describes.
But agility is more than an effective response to change. It also encompasses the
philosophy espoused in the manifesto noted at the beginning of this chapter. It
encourages team structures and attitudes that make communication (among team
members, between technologists and business people, between software engineers
and their managers) more facile. It emphasizes rapid delivery of operational soft-
ware and de-emphasizes the importance of intermediate work products (not always
a good thing); it adopts the customer as a part of the development team and works
to eliminate the “us and them” attitude that continues to pervade many software
projects; it recognizes that planning in an uncertain world has its limits and that a
project plan must be flexible.
Agility can be applied to any software process. However, to accomplish this, it is
essential that the process be designed in a way that allows the project team to adapt
tasks and to streamline them, conduct planning in a way that understands the fluid-
ity of an agile development approach, eliminate all but the most essential work prod-
ucts and keep them lean, and emphasize an incremental delivery strategy that gets
working software to the customer as rapidly as feasible for the product type and
operational environment.
3.2
AGILITY AND THE COST OF CHANGE
The conventional wisdom in software development (supported by decades of expe-
rience) is that the cost of change increases nonlinearly as a project progresses
(Figure 3.1, solid black curve). It is relatively easy to accommodate a change when a
software team is gathering requirements (early in a project). A usage scenario might
have to be modified, a list of functions may be extended, or a written specification
can be edited. The costs of doing this work are minimal, and the time required will
CHAPTER 3
AGILE DEVELOPMENT
67
Don’t make the
mistake of assuming
that agility gives you
license to hack out
solutions. A process is
required and discipline
is essential.
MODULE 3

not adversely affect the outcome of the project. But what if we fast-forward a num-
ber of months? The team is in the middle of validation testing (something that occurs
relatively late in the project), and an important stakeholder is requesting a major
functional change. The change requires a modification to the architectural design of
the software, the design and construction of three new components, modifications
to another five components, the design of new tests, and so on. Costs escalate
quickly, and the time and cost required to ensure that the change is made without
unintended side effects is nontrivial.
Proponents of agility (e.g., [Bec00], [Amb04]) argue that a well-designed agile
process “flattens” the cost of change curve (Figure 3.1, shaded, solid curve), allowing
a software team to accommodate changes late in a software project without dramatic
cost and time impact. You’ve already learned that the agile process encompasses in-
cremental delivery. When incremental delivery is coupled with other agile practices
such as continuous unit testing and pair programming (discussed later in this chap-
ter), the cost of making a change is attenuated. Although debate about the degree to
which the cost curve flattens is ongoing, there is evidence [Coc01a] to suggest that a
significant reduction in the cost of change can be achieved.
3.3
WHAT IS AN AGILE PROCESS?
Any agile software process is characterized in a manner that addresses a number of
key assumptions [Fow02] about the majority of software projects: 
1.
It is difficult to predict in advance which software requirements will persist
and which will change. It is equally difficult to predict how customer
priorities will change as the project proceeds.
68
PART ONE
THE SOFTWARE PROCESS
Cost of change
using conventional
software processes
Cost of change
using agile processes
Idealized cost of change
using agile process
Development schedule progress
Development cost
FIGURE 3.1
Change costs
as a function
of time in
development
uote:
“Agility is dynamic,
content specific,
aggressively
change embracing,
and growth
oriented.”
–Steven
Goldman et al.
An agile process
reduces the cost of
change because
software is released in
increments and change
can be better
controlled within an
increment.

2.
For many types of software, design and construction are interleaved. That is,
both activities should be performed in tandem so that design models are
proven as they are created. It is difficult to predict how much design is
necessary before construction is used to prove the design.
3.
Analysis, design, construction, and testing are not as predictable (from a
planning point of view) as we might like.
Given these three assumptions, an important question arises: How do we create a
process that can manage unpredictability? The answer, as I have already noted, lies
in process adaptability (to rapidly changing project and technical conditions). An
agile process, therefore, must be adaptable.
But continual adaptation without forward progress accomplishes little. Therefore,
an agile software process must adapt incrementally. To accomplish incremental adap-
tation, an agile team requires customer feedback (so that the appropriate adaptations
can be made). An effective catalyst for customer feedback is an operational prototype
or a portion of an operational system. Hence, an incremental development strategy
should be instituted. Software increments (executable prototypes or portions of an op-
erational system) must be delivered in short time periods so that adaptation keeps pace
with change (unpredictability). This iterative approach enables the customer to evalu-
ate the software increment regularly, provide necessary feedback to the software team,
and influence the process adaptations that are made to accommodate the feedback.
3.3.1
Agility Principles
The Agile Alliance (see [Agi03], [Fow01]) defines 12 agility principles for those who
want to achieve agility: 
1.
Our highest priority is to satisfy the customer through early and continuous
delivery of valuable software.
2.
Welcome changing requirements, even late in development. Agile processes
harness change for the customer’s competitive advantage.
3.
Deliver working software frequently, from a couple of weeks to a couple of
months, with a preference to the shorter timescale.
4.
Business people and developers must work together daily throughout the
project.
5.
Build projects around motivated individuals. Give them the environment and
support they need, and trust them to get the job done.
6.
The most efficient and effective method of conveying information to and
within a development team is face-to-face conversation.
7.
Working software is the primary measure of progress.
8.
Agile processes promote sustainable development. The sponsors, developers,
and users should be able to maintain a constant pace indefinitely.
CHAPTER 3
AGILE DEVELOPMENT
69
WebRef
A comprehensive
collection of articles on
the agile process 
can be found at
www.aanpo.org/
articles/index.
Although agile
processes embrace
change, it is still
important to examine
the reasons for
change.
Working software is
important, but don’t
forget that it must also
exhibit a variety of
quality attributes
including reliability,
usability, and 
maintainability.

9.
Continuous attention to technical excellence and good design enhances
agility.
10.
Simplicity—the art of maximizing the amount of work not done—is 
essential.
11.
The best architectures, requirements, and designs emerge from self–
organizing teams.
12.
At regular intervals, the team reflects on how to become more effective, then
tunes and adjusts its behavior accordingly.
Not every agile process model applies these 12 principles with equal weight, and
some models choose to ignore (or at least downplay) the importance of one or more
of the principles. However, the principles define an agile spirit that is maintained in
each of the process models presented in this chapter.
3.3.2
The Politics of Agile Development
There is considerable debate (sometimes strident) about the benefits and applicabil-
ity of agile software development as opposed to more conventional software engi-
neering processes. Jim Highsmith [Hig02a] (facetiously) states the extremes when he
characterizes the feeling of the pro-agility camp (“agilists”). “Traditional methodolo-
gists are a bunch of stick-in-the-muds who’d rather produce flawless documentation
than a working system that meets business needs.” As a counterpoint, he states
(again, facetiously) the position of the traditional software engineering camp: “Light-
weight, er, ‘agile’ methodologists are a bunch of glorified hackers who are going to
be in for a heck of a surprise when they try to scale up their toys into enterprise-wide
software.”
Like all software technology arguments, this methodology debate risks degener-
ating into a religious war. If warfare breaks out, rational thought disappears and
beliefs rather than facts guide decision making.
No one is against agility. The real question is: What is the best way to achieve it?
As important, how do you build software that meets customers’ needs today and
exhibits the quality characteristics that will enable it to be extended and scaled to
meet customers’ needs over the long term?
There are no absolute answers to either of these questions. Even within the agile
school itself, there are many proposed process models (Section 3.4), each with a
subtly different approach to the agility problem. Within each model there is a set of
“ideas” (agilists are loath to call them “work tasks”) that represent a significant
departure from traditional software engineering. And yet, many agile concepts are
simply adaptations of good software engineering concepts. Bottom line: there is
much that can be gained by considering the best of both schools and virtually
nothing to be gained by denigrating either approach.
If you have further interest, see [Hig01], [Hig02a], and [DeM02] for an entertain-
ing summary of other important technical and political issues.
70
PART ONE
THE SOFTWARE PROCESS
You don’t have to
choose between agility
and software engi-
neering. Rather, define
a software engineering
approach that is agile.

3.3.3
Human Factors
Proponents of agile software development take great pains to emphasize the impor-
tance of “people factors.” As Cockburn and Highsmith [Coc01a] state, “Agile devel-
opment focuses on the talents and skills of individuals, molding the process to
specific people and teams.” The key point in this statement is that the process molds
to the needs of the people and team, not the other way around.2
If members of the software team are to drive the characteristics of the process that
is applied to build software, a number of key traits must exist among the people on
an agile team and the team itself:
Competence.
In an agile development (as well as software engineering)
context, “competence” encompasses innate talent, specific software-related
skills, and overall knowledge of the process that the team has chosen to
apply. Skill and knowledge of process can and should be taught to all people
who serve as agile team members.
Common focus.
Although members of the agile team may perform differ-
ent tasks and bring different skills to the project, all should be focused on one
goal—to deliver a working software increment to the customer within the
time promised. To achieve this goal, the team will also focus on continual
adaptations (small and large) that will make the process fit the needs of the
team.
Collaboration.
Software engineering (regardless of process) is about as-
sessing, analyzing, and using information that is communicated to the soft-
ware team; creating information that will help all stakeholders understand
the work of the team; and building information (computer software and rele-
vant databases) that provides business value for the customer. To accomplish
these tasks, team members must collaborate—with one another and all other
stakeholders.
Decision-making ability.
Any good software team (including agile teams)
must be allowed the freedom to control its own destiny. This implies that the
team is given autonomy—decision-making authority for both technical and
project issues.
Fuzzy problem-solving ability.
Software managers must recognize that
the agile team will continually have to deal with ambiguity and will continu-
ally be buffeted by change. In some cases, the team must accept the fact that
the problem they are solving today may not be the problem that needs to be
solved tomorrow. However, lessons learned from any problem-solving
CHAPTER 3
AGILE DEVELOPMENT
71
2
Successful software engineering organizations recognize this reality regardless of the process
model they choose.
uote:
“Agile methods
derive much of
their agility by
relying on the
tacit knowledge
embodied in the
team, rather than
writing the
knowledge down
in plans.”
Barry Boehm
What key
traits must
exist among the
people on an
effective software
team?
?
uote:
“What counts as
barely sufficient
for one team is
either overly
sufficient or
insufficient for
another.”
Alistair
Cockburn

activity (including those that solve the wrong problem) may be of benefit to
the team later in the project.
Mutual trust and respect.
The agile team must become what DeMarco
and Lister [DeM98] call a “jelled” team (Chapter 24). A jelled team exhibits
the trust and respect that are necessary to make them “so strongly knit that
the whole is greater than the sum of the parts.” [DeM98]
Self-organization.
In the context of agile development, self-organization
implies three things: (1) the agile team organizes itself for the work to be
done, (2) the team organizes the process to best accommodate its local envi-
ronment, (3) the team organizes the work schedule to best achieve delivery
of the software increment. Self-organization has a number of technical bene-
fits, but more importantly, it serves to improve collaboration and boost team
morale. In essence, the team serves as its own management. Ken Schwaber
[Sch02] addresses these issues when he writes: “The team selects how much
work it believes it can perform within the iteration, and the team commits to
the work. Nothing demotivates a team as much as someone else making
commitments for it. Nothing motivates a team as much as accepting the
responsibility for fulfilling commitments that it made itself.”
3.4
EXTREME PROGRAMMING (XP)
In order to illustrate an agile process in a bit more detail, I’ll provide you with an
overview of Extreme Programming (XP), the most widely used approach to agile soft-
ware development. Although early work on the ideas and methods associated with
XP occurred during the late 1980s, the seminal work on the subject has been written
by Kent Beck [Bec04a]. More recently, a variant of XP, called Industrial XP (IXP) has
been proposed [Ker05]. IXP refines XP and targets the agile process specifically for
use within large organizations.
3.4.1
XP Values
Beck [Bec04a] defines a set of five values that establish a foundation for all work per-
formed as part of XP—communication, simplicity, feedback, courage, and respect. Each
of these values is used as a driver for specific XP activities, actions, and tasks.
In order to achieve effective communication between software engineers and
other stakeholders (e.g., to establish required features and functions for the soft-
ware), XP emphasizes close, yet informal (verbal) collaboration between customers
and developers, the establishment of effective metaphors3 for communicating
important concepts, continuous feedback, and the avoidance of voluminous docu-
mentation as a communication medium.
72
PART ONE
THE SOFTWARE PROCESS
A self-organizing team
is in control of the
work it performs. The
team makes its own
commitments and
defines plans to
achieve them.
3
In the XP context, a metaphor is “a story that everyone—customers, programmers, and managers—
can tell about how the system works” [Bec04a].

To achieve simplicity, XP restricts developers to design only for immediate needs,
rather than consider future needs. The intent is to create a simple design that can be
easily implemented in code). If the design must be improved, it can be refactored4 at
a later time.
Feedback is derived from three sources: the implemented software itself, the
customer, and other software team members. By designing and implementing an
effective testing strategy (Chapters 17 through 20), the software (via test results) pro-
vides the agile team with feedback. XP makes use of the unit test as its primary test-
ing tactic. As each class is developed, the team develops a unit test to exercise each
operation according to its specified functionality. As an increment is delivered to a
customer, the user stories or use cases (Chapter 5) that are implemented by the
increment are used as a basis for acceptance tests. The degree to which the software
implements the output, function, and behavior of the use case is a form of feedback.
Finally, as new requirements are derived as part of iterative planning, the team pro-
vides the customer with rapid feedback regarding cost and schedule impact.
Beck [Bec04a] argues that strict adherence to certain XP practices demands
courage. A better word might be discipline. For example, there is often significant
pressure to design for future requirements. Most software teams succumb, arguing
that “designing for tomorrow” will save time and effort in the long run. An agile XP
team must have the discipline (courage) to design for today, recognizing that future
requirements may change dramatically, thereby demanding substantial rework of
the design and implemented code.
By following each of these values, the agile team inculcates respect among it
members, between other stakeholders and team members, and indirectly, for the
software itself. As they achieve successful delivery of software increments, the team
develops growing respect for the XP process.
3.4.2
The XP Process
Extreme Programming uses an object-oriented approach (Appendix 2) as its pre-
ferred development paradigm and encompasses a set of rules and practices that
occur within the context of four framework activities: planning, design, coding, and
testing. Figure 3.2 illustrates the XP process and notes some of the key ideas and
tasks that are associated with each framework activity. Key XP activities are sum-
marized in the paragraphs that follow.
Planning.
The planning activity (also called the planning game) begins with
listening—a requirements gathering activity that enables the technical members of
the XP team to understand the business context for the software and to get a broad
CHAPTER 3
AGILE DEVELOPMENT
73
4
Refactoring allows a software engineer to improve the internal structure of a design (or source
code) without changing its external functionality or behavior. In essence, refactoring can be used
to improve the efficiency, readability, or performance of a design or the code that implements a
design.
Keep it simple
whenever you can, but
recognize that
continual “refactoring”
can absorb significant
time and resources.
uote:
“XP is the answer
to the question,
‘How little can we
do and still build
great software?’“
Anonymous
WebRef
An excellent overview
of “rules” for XP can
be found at www
.extremeprogramm
ing.org/rules.html.

feel for required output and major features and functionality. Listening leads to the
creation of a set of “stories” (also called user stories) that describe required output,
features, and functionality for software to be built. Each story (similar to use cases
described in Chapter 5) is written by the customer and is placed on an index card.
The customer assigns a value (i.e., a priority) to the story based on the overall busi-
ness value of the feature or function.5 Members of the XP team then assess each
story and assign a cost—measured in development weeks—to it. If the story is esti-
mated to require more than three development weeks, the customer is asked to split
the story into smaller stories and the assignment of value and cost occurs again. It
is important to note that new stories can be written at any time.
Customers and developers work together to decide how to group stories into the
next release (the next software increment) to be developed by the XP team. Once a
basic commitment (agreement on stories to be included, delivery date, and other
project matters) is made for a release, the XP team orders the stories that will be de-
veloped in one of three ways: (1) all stories will be implemented immediately (within
a few weeks), (2) the stories with highest value will be moved up in the schedule and
implemented first, or (3) the riskiest stories will be moved up in the schedule and
implemented first.
After the first project release (also called a software increment) has been deliv-
ered, the XP team computes project velocity. Stated simply, project velocity is the
74
PART ONE
THE SOFTWARE PROCESS
user stories
 values
 acceptance test criteria
iteration plan
simple design
 CRC cards
unit test
 continuous integration
software increment
 project velocity computed
spike solutions
 prototypes
refactoring
pair programming
acceptance testing
Release
design
coding
planning
test
FIGURE 3.2
The Extreme
Programming
process
5
The value of a story may also be dependent on the presence of another story.
WebRef
A worthwhile XP
“planning game” can
be found at:
c2.com/cgi/
wiki?planningGame.
What is an
XP “story”?
?

number of customer stories implemented during the first release. Project velocity can
then be used to (1) help estimate delivery dates and schedule for subsequent releases
and (2) determine whether an overcommitment has been made for all stories across
the entire development project. If an overcommitment occurs, the content of releases
is modified or end delivery dates are changed.
As development work proceeds, the customer can add stories, change the value
of an existing story, split stories, or eliminate them. The XP team then reconsiders all
remaining releases and modifies its plans accordingly.
Design.
XP design rigorously follows the KIS (keep it simple) principle. A simple
design is always preferred over a more complex representation. In addition, the de-
sign provides implementation guidance for a story as it is written—nothing less,
nothing more. The design of extra functionality (because the developer assumes it
will be required later) is discouraged.6
XP encourages the use of CRC cards (Chapter 7) as an effective mechanism for
thinking about the software in an object-oriented context. CRC (class-responsibility-
collaborator) cards identify and organize the object-oriented classes7 that are rele-
vant to the current software increment. The XP team conducts the design exercise
using a process similar to the one described in Chapter 8. The CRC cards are the only
design work product produced as part of the XP process.
If a difficult design problem is encountered as part of the design of a story, XP rec-
ommends the immediate creation of an operational prototype of that portion of the
design. Called a spike solution, the design prototype is implemented and evaluated.
The intent is to lower risk when true implementation starts and to validate the orig-
inal estimates for the story containing the design problem.
In the preceding section, we noted that XP encourages refactoring—a construction
technique that is also a method for design optimization. Fowler [Fow00] describes
refactoring in the following manner:
Refactoring is the process of changing a software system in such a way that it does not
alter the external behavior of the code yet improves the internal structure. It is a disci-
plined way to clean up code [and modify/simplify the internal design] that minimizes the
chances of introducing bugs. In essence, when you refactor you are improving the design
of the code after it has been written.
Because XP design uses virtually no notation and produces few, if any, work prod-
ucts other than CRC cards and spike solutions, design is viewed as a transient arti-
fact that can and should be continually modified as construction proceeds. The intent
of refactoring is to control these modifications by suggesting small design changes
CHAPTER 3
AGILE DEVELOPMENT
75
Project velocity is a
subtle measure of
team productivity.
6
These design guidelines should be followed in every software engineering method, although there
are times when sophisticated design notation and terminology may get in the way of simplicity.
7
Object-oriented classes are discussed in Appendix 2, in Chapter 8, and throughout Part 2 of this
book.
XP deemphasizes the
importance of design.
Not everyone agrees.
In fact, there are times
when design should be
emphasized.
WebRef
Refactoring techniques
and tools can be
found at:
www.refactoring
.com.

that “can radically improve the design” [Fow00]. It should be noted, however, that
the effort required for refactoring can grow dramatically as the size of an application
grows.
A central notion in XP is that design occurs both before and after coding com-
mences. Refactoring means that design occurs continuously as the system is con-
structed. In fact, the construction activity itself will provide the XP team with
guidance on how to improve the design.
Coding.
After stories are developed and preliminary design work is done, the team
does not move to code, but rather develops a series of unit tests that will exercise
each of the stories that is to be included in the current release (software increment).8
Once the unit test9 has been created, the developer is better able to focus on what
must be implemented to pass the test. Nothing extraneous is added (KIS). Once the
code is complete, it can be unit-tested immediately, thereby providing instantaneous
feedback to the developers.
A key concept during the coding activity (and one of the most talked about aspects
of XP) is pair programming. XP recommends that two people work together at one
computer workstation to create code for a story. This provides a mechanism for real-
time problem solving (two heads are often better than one) and real-time quality as-
surance (the code is reviewed as it is created). It also keeps the developers focused
on the problem at hand. In practice, each person takes on a slightly different role. For
example, one person might think about the coding details of a particular portion of
the design while the other ensures that coding standards (a required part of XP) are
being followed or that the code for the story will satisfy the unit test that has been
developed to validate the code against the story.
As pair programmers complete their work, the code they develop is integrated
with the work of others. In some cases this is performed on a daily basis by an inte-
gration team. In other cases, the pair programmers have integration responsibility.
This “continuous integration” strategy helps to avoid compatibility and interfacing
problems and provides a “smoke testing” environment (Chapter 17) that helps to
uncover errors early.
Testing.
I have already noted that the creation of unit tests before coding com-
mences is a key element of the XP approach. The unit tests that are created should
be implemented using a framework that enables them to be automated (hence, they
can be executed easily and repeatedly). This encourages a regression testing strat-
egy (Chapter 17) whenever code is modified (which is often, given the XP refactor-
ing philosophy).
76
PART ONE
THE SOFTWARE PROCESS
Refactoring improves
the internal structure of
a design (or source
code) without
changing its external
functionality or
behavior.
WebRef
Useful information on
XP can be obtained 
at www
.xprogramming.
com.
8
This approach is analogous to knowing the exam questions before you begin to study. It makes
studying much easier by focusing attention only on the questions that will be asked.
9
Unit testing, discussed in detail in Chapter 17, focuses on an individual software component, exer-
cising the component’s interface, data structures, and functionality in an effort to uncover errors
that are local to the component.
What is 
pair
programming?
?
Many software teams
are populated by indi-
vidualists. You’ll have
to work to change that
culture if pair program-
ming is to work effec-
tively.
How are unit
tests used in
XP??

As the individual unit tests are organized into a “universal testing suite” [Wel99],
integration and validation testing of the system can occur on a daily basis. This pro-
vides the XP team with a continual indication of progress and also can raise warn-
ing flags early if things go awry. Wells [Wel99] states: “Fixing small problems every
few hours takes less time than fixing huge problems just before the deadline.”
XP acceptance tests, also called customer tests, are specified by the customer and
focus on overall system features and functionality that are visible and reviewable by
the customer. Acceptance tests are derived from user stories that have been imple-
mented as part of a software release.
3.4.3
Industrial XP
Joshua Kerievsky [Ker05] describes Industrial Extreme Programming (IXP) in the fol-
lowing manner: “IXP is an organic evolution of XP. It is imbued with XP’s minimal-
ist, customer-centric, test-driven spirit. IXP differs most from the original XP in its
greater inclusion of management, its expanded role for customers, and its upgraded
technical practices.” IXP incorporates six new practices that are designed to help
ensure that an XP project works successfully for significant projects within a large
organization.
Readiness assessment.
Prior to the initiation of an IXP project, the organ-
ization should conduct a readiness assessment. The assessment ascertains
whether (1) an appropriate development environment exists to support IXP,
(2) the team will be populated by the proper set of stakeholders, (3) the or-
ganization has a distinct quality program and supports continuous improve-
ment, (4) the organizational culture will support the new values of an agile
team, and (5) the broader project community will be populated appropriately.
Project community.
Classic XP suggests that the right people be used to
populate the agile team to ensure success. The implication is that people on
the team must be well-trained, adaptable and skilled, and have the proper
temperament to contribute to a self-organizing team. When XP is to be
applied for a significant project in a large organization, the concept of the
“team” should morph into that of a community. A community may have a
technologist and customers who are central to the success of a project as
well as many other stakeholders (e.g., legal staff, quality auditors, manufac-
turing or sales types) who “are often at the periphery of an IXP project yet
they may play important roles on the project” [Ker05]. In IXP, the community
members and their roles should be explicitly defined and mechanisms for
communication and coordination between community members should be
established.
Project chartering.
The IXP team assesses the project itself to determine
whether an appropriate business justification for the project exists and
whether the project will further the overall goals and objectives of the
CHAPTER 3
AGILE DEVELOPMENT
77
XP acceptance tests
are derived from user
stories.
What new
practices are
appended to XP
to create IXP?
?
uote:
“Ability is what
you’re capable of
doing. Motivation
determines what
you do. Attitude
determines how
well you do it.”
Lou Holtz

organization. Chartering also examines the context of the project to deter-
mine how it complements, extends, or replaces existing systems or
processes.
Test-driven management.
An IXP project requires measurable criteria for
assessing the state of the project and the progress that has been made to
date. Test-driven management establishes a series of measurable “destina-
tions” [Ker05] and then defines mechanisms for determining whether or not
these destinations have been reached.
Retrospectives.
An IXP team conducts a specialized technical review
(Chapter 15) after a software increment is delivered. Called a retrospective,
the review examines “issues, events, and lessons-learned” [Ker05] across a
software increment and/or the entire software release. The intent is to
improve the IXP process.
Continuous learning.
Because learning is a vital part of continuous
process improvement, members of the XP team are encouraged (and possi-
bly, incented) to learn new methods and techniques that can lead to a higher-
quality product.
In addition to the six new practices discussed, IXP modifies a number of existing
XP practices. Story-driven development (SDD) insists that stories for acceptance tests
be written before a single line of code is generated. Domain-driven design (DDD) is
an improvement on the “system metaphor” concept used in XP. DDD [Eva03] sug-
gests the evolutionary creation of a domain model that “accurately represents how
domain experts think about their subject” [Ker05]. Pairing extends the XP pair-
programming concept to include managers and other stakeholders. The intent is to
improve knowledge sharing among XP team members who may not be directly in-
volved in technical development. Iterative usability discourages front-loaded inter-
face design in favor of usability design that evolves as software increments are
delivered and users’ interaction with the software is studied.
IXP makes smaller modifications to other XP practices and redefines certain roles
and responsibilities to make them more amenable to significant projects for large
organizations. For further discussion of IXP, visit http://industrialxp.org.
3.4.4
The XP Debate
All new process models and methods spur worthwhile discussion and in some in-
stances heated debate. Extreme Programming has done both. In an interesting book
that examines the efficacy of XP, Stephens and Rosenberg [Ste03] argue that many
XP practices are worthwhile, but others have been overhyped, and a few are prob-
lematic. The authors suggest that the codependent nature of XP practices are both
its strength and its weakness. Because many organizations adopt only a subset of XP
practices, they weaken the efficacy of the entire process. Proponents counter that
XP is continuously evolving and that many of the issues raised by critics have been
78
PART ONE
THE SOFTWARE PROCESS

addressed as XP practice matures. Among the issues that continue to trouble some
critics of XP are:10
• Requirements volatility. Because the customer is an active member of the XP
team, changes to requirements are requested informally. As a consequence,
the scope of the project can change and earlier work may have to be
modified to accommodate current needs. Proponents argue that this happens
regardless of the process that is applied and that XP provides mechanisms for
controlling scope creep.
• Conflicting customer needs. Many projects have multiple customers, each with
his own set of needs. In XP, the team itself is tasked with assimilating the
needs of different customers, a job that may be beyond their scope of
authority.
• Requirements are expressed informally. User stories and acceptance tests are
the only explicit manifestation of requirements in XP. Critics argue that a
more formal model or specification is often needed to ensure that omissions,
inconsistencies, and errors are uncovered before the system is built. Propo-
nents counter that the changing nature of requirements makes such models
and specification obsolete almost as soon as they are developed.
• Lack of formal design. XP deemphasizes the need for architectural design and
in many instances, suggests that design of all kinds should be relatively
informal. Critics argue that when complex systems are built, design must be
emphasized to ensure that the overall structure of the software will exhibit
quality and maintainability. XP proponents suggest that the incremental
nature of the XP process limits complexity (simplicity is a core value) and
therefore reduces the need for extensive design.
You should note that every software process has flaws and that many software or-
ganizations have used XP successfully. The key is to recognize where a process may
have weaknesses and to adapt it to the specific needs of your organization.
CHAPTER 3
AGILE DEVELOPMENT
79
10 For a detailed look at some thoughtful criticism that has been leveled at XP, visit
www.softwarereality.com/ExtremeProgramming.jsp.
What are
some of the
issues that lead to
an XP debate?
?
The scene: Doug Miller’s office.
The Players: Doug Miller, software engineering
manager; Jamie Lazar, software team member; Vinod
Raman, software team member.
The conversation:
(A knock on the door, Jamie and Vinod enter Doug’s office)
Jamie: Doug, you got a minute?
SAFEHOME
Considering Agile Software Development

3.5
OTHER AGILE PROCESS MODELS
The history of software engineering is littered with dozens of obsolete process
descriptions and methodologies, modeling methods and notations, tools, and
technology. Each flared in notoriety and was then eclipsed by something new and
(purportedly) better. With the introduction of a wide array of agile process models—
each contending for acceptance within the software development community—the
agile movement is following the same historical path.11
As I noted in the last section, the most widely used of all agile process models
is Extreme Programming (XP). But many other agile process models have been
proposed and are in use across the industry. Among the most common are:
• Adaptive Software Development (ASD)
• Scrum
• Dynamic Systems Development Method (DSDM)
80
PART ONE
THE SOFTWARE PROCESS
Doug: Sure Jamie, what’s up?
Jamie: We’ve been thinking about our process
discussion yesterday . . . you know, what process we’re
going to choose for this new SafeHome project.
Doug: And?
Vinod: I was talking to a friend at another company,
and he was telling me about Extreme Programming. It’s
an agile process model . . . heard of it?
Doug: Yeah, some good, some bad.
Jamie: Well, it sounds pretty good to us. Lets you
develop software really fast, uses something called pair
programming to do real-time quality checks . . . it’s pretty
cool, I think.
Doug: It does have a lot of really good ideas. I like the
pair-programming concept, for instance, and the idea
that stakeholders should be part of the team.
Jamie: Huh? You mean that marketing will work on the
project team with us?
Doug (nodding): They’re a stakeholder, aren’t they?
Jamie: Jeez . . . they’ll be requesting changes every five
minutes.
Vinod: Not necessarily. My friend said that there are
ways to “embrace” changes during an XP project.
Doug: So you guys think we should use XP?
Jamie: It’s definitely worth considering.
Doug: I agree. And even if we choose an incremental
model as our approach, there’s no reason why we can’t
incorporate much of what XP has to offer.
Vinod: Doug, before you said “some good, some bad.”
What was the “bad”?
Doug: The thing I don’t like is the way XP downplays
analysis and design . . . sort of says that writing code is
where the action is . . . 
(The team members look at one another and smile.)
Doug: So you agree with the XP approach?
Jamie (speaking for both): Writing code is what
we do, Boss!
Doug (laughing): True, but I’d like to see you spend a
little less time coding and then recoding and a little more
time analyzing what has to be done and designing a
solution that works.
Vinod: Maybe we can have it both ways, agility with a
little discipline.
Doug: I think we can, Vinod. In fact, I’m sure of it.
uote:
“Our profession
goes through
methodologies like
a 14-year-old goes
through clothing.”
Stephen
Hawrysh and
Jim Ruprecht
11 This is not a bad thing. Before one or more models or methods are accepted as a de facto standard,
all must contend for the hearts and minds of software engineers. The “winners” evolve into best
practice, while the “losers” either disappear or merge with the winning models.

• Crystal
• Feature Drive Development (FDD)
• Lean Software Development (LSD)
• Agile Modeling (AM)
• Agile Unified Process (AUP)
In the sections that follow, I present a very brief overview of each of these agile
process models. It is important to note that all agile process models conform (to a
greater or lesser degree) to the Manifesto for Agile Software Development and the prin-
ciples noted in Section 3.3.1. For additional detail, refer to the references noted in
each subsection or for a survey, examine the “agile software development” entry
in Wikipedia.12
3.5.1
Adaptive Software Development (ASD)
Adaptive Software Development (ASD) has been proposed by Jim Highsmith [Hig00] as
a technique for building complex software and systems. The philosophical under-
pinnings of ASD focus on human collaboration and team self-organization.
Highsmith argues that an agile, adaptive development approach based on collab-
oration is “as much a source of order in our complex interactions as discipline and
engineering.” He defines an ASD “life cycle” (Figure 3.3) that incorporates three
phases, speculation, collaboration, and learning.
CHAPTER 3
AGILE DEVELOPMENT
81
12 See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Agile_software_development#Agile_methods.
WebRef
Useful resources for
ASD can be found at
www.adaptivesd
.com.
adaptive cycle planning
 mission statement
 project constraints
 basic requirements
time-boxed release plan
components implemented/tested
 focus groups for feedback
 formal technical reviews
postmortems
Requirements gathering
 JAD
 mini-specs
software increment
 adjustments for subsequent cycles
Release
collaboration
speculation
learning
FIGURE 3.3
Adaptive
software
development

During speculation, the project is initiated and adaptive cycle planning is con-
ducted. Adaptive cycle planning uses project initiation information—the customer’s
mission statement, project constraints (e.g., delivery dates or user descriptions), and
basic requirements—to define the set of release cycles (software increments) that
will be required for the project.
No matter how complete and farsighted the cycle plan, it will invariably change.
Based on information obtained at the completion of the first cycle, the plan is re-
viewed and adjusted so that planned work better fits the reality in which an ASD
team is working.
Motivated people use collaboration in a way that multiplies their talent and cre-
ative output beyond their absolute numbers. This approach is a recurring theme in
all agile methods. But collaboration is not easy. It encompasses communication and
teamwork, but it also emphasizes individualism, because individual creativity plays
an important role in collaborative thinking. It is, above all, a matter of trust. People
working together must trust one another to (1) criticize without animosity, (2) assist
without resentment, (3) work as hard as or harder than they do, (4) have the skill set
to contribute to the work at hand, and (5) communicate problems or concerns in a
way that leads to effective action.
As members of an ASD team begin to develop the components that are part of an
adaptive cycle, the emphasis is on “learning” as much as it is on progress toward
a completed cycle. In fact, Highsmith [Hig00] argues that software developers often
overestimate their own understanding (of the technology, the process, and the proj-
ect) and that learning will help them to improve their level of real understanding.
ASD teams learn in three ways: focus groups (Chapter 5), technical reviews (Chap-
ter 14), and project postmortems.
The ASD philosophy has merit regardless of the process model that is used. ASD’s
overall emphasis on the dynamics of self-organizing teams, interpersonal collabo-
ration, and individual and team learning yield software project teams that have a
much higher likelihood of success.
3.5.2
Scrum
Scrum (the name is derived from an activity that occurs during a rugby match13) is
an agile software development method that was conceived by Jeff Sutherland and his
development team in the early 1990s. In recent years, further development on the
Scrum methods has been performed by Schwaber and Beedle [Sch01a].
Scrum principles are consistent with the agile manifesto and are used to guide
development activities within a process that incorporates the following framework
activities: requirements, analysis, design, evolution, and delivery. Within each
82
PART ONE
THE SOFTWARE PROCESS
Effective collaboration
with your customer will
only occur if you
jettison any “us and
them” attitudes.
ASD emphasizes
learning as a key
element in achieving 
a “self-organizing”
team.
13 A group of players forms around the ball and the teammates work together (sometimes violently!)
to move the ball downfield.
WebRef
Useful Scrum
information and
resources can be found
at www
.controlchaos.com.

every 24
hours
30 days
Scrum: 15 minute daily meeting.
Team members respond to basics:
1) What did you do since last Scrum
 
meeting?
2) Do you have any obstacles?
3) What will you do before next
 
meeting?
Sprint Backlog:
Feature(s)
assigned
to sprint
Product Backlog:
Prioritized product features desired by the customer
Backlog
items
expanded
by team
New functionality
is demonstrated
at end of sprint
framework activity, work tasks occur within a process pattern (discussed in the fol-
lowing paragraph) called a sprint. The work conducted within a sprint (the number
of sprints required for each framework activity will vary depending on product com-
plexity and size) is adapted to the problem at hand and is defined and often modified
in real time by the Scrum team. The overall flow of the Scrum process is illustrated
in Figure 3.4.
Scrum emphasizes the use of a set of software process patterns [Noy02] that have
proven effective for projects with tight timelines, changing requirements, and business
criticality. Each of these process patterns defines a set of development actions:
Backlog—a prioritized list of project requirements or features that provide busi-
ness value for the customer. Items can be added to the backlog at any time (this is
how changes are introduced). The product manager assesses the backlog and
updates priorities as required.
Sprints—consist of work units that are required to achieve a requirement de-
fined in the backlog that must be fit into a predefined time-box14 (typically 30 days).
CHAPTER 3
AGILE DEVELOPMENT
83
14 A time-box is a project management term (see Part 4 of this book) that indicates a period of time
that has been allocated to accomplish some task.
FIGURE 3.4
Scrum process
flow
Scrum incorporates a
set of process patterns
that emphasize project
priorities,
compartmentalized
work units,
communication, and
frequent customer
feedback.

Changes (e.g., backlog work items) are not introduced during the sprint. Hence, the
sprint allows team members to work in a short-term, but stable environment.
Scrum meetings—are short (typically 15 minutes) meetings held daily by the Scrum
team. Three key questions are asked and answered by all team members [Noy02]:
• What did you do since the last team meeting?
• What obstacles are you encountering?
• What do you plan to accomplish by the next team meeting?
A team leader, called a Scrum master, leads the meeting and assesses the responses
from each person. The Scrum meeting helps the team to uncover potential problems
as early as possible. Also, these daily meetings lead to “knowledge socialization”
[Bee99] and thereby promote a self-organizing team structure.
Demos—deliver the software increment to the customer so that functionality that
has been implemented can be demonstrated and evaluated by the customer. It is im-
portant to note that the demo may not contain all planned functionality, but rather
those functions that can be delivered within the time-box that was established.
Beedle and his colleagues [Bee99] present a comprehensive discussion of these pat-
terns in which they state: “Scrum assumes up-front the existence of chaos. . . . ” The
Scrum process patterns enable a software team to work successfully in a world
where the elimination of uncertainty is impossible.
3.5.3
Dynamic Systems Development Method (DSDM)
The Dynamic Systems Development Method (DSDM) [Sta97] is an agile software devel-
opment approach that “provides a framework for building and maintaining systems
which meet tight time constraints through the use of incremental prototyping in a con-
trolled project environment” [CCS02]. The DSDM philosophy is borrowed from a mod-
ified version of the Pareto principle—80 percent of an application can be delivered in
20 percent of the time it would take to deliver the complete (100 percent) application.
DSDM is an iterative software process in which each iteration follows the 80 per-
cent rule. That is, only enough work is required for each increment to facilitate
movement to the next increment. The remaining detail can be completed later when
more business requirements are known or changes have been requested and
accommodated.
The DSDM Consortium (www.dsdm.org) is a worldwide group of member com-
panies that collectively take on the role of “keeper” of the method. The consortium
has defined an agile process model, called the DSDM life cycle that defines three dif-
ferent iterative cycles, preceded by two additional life cycle activities:
Feasibility study—establishes the basic business requirements and constraints
associated with the application to be built and then assesses whether the applica-
tion is a viable candidate for the DSDM process.
84
PART ONE
THE SOFTWARE PROCESS
WebRef
Useful resources for
DSSD can be found at
www.dsdm.org.

Business study—establishes the functional and information requirements that
will allow the application to provide business value; also, defines the basic
application architecture and identifies the maintainability requirements for the
application.
Functional model iteration—produces a set of incremental prototypes that
demonstrate functionality for the customer. (Note: All DSDM prototypes are in-
tended to evolve into the deliverable application.) The intent during this iterative
cycle is to gather additional requirements by eliciting feedback from users as they
exercise the prototype.
Design and build iteration—revisits prototypes built during functional model
iteration to ensure that each has been engineered in a manner that will enable it to
provide operational business value for end users. In some cases, functional model
iteration and design and build iteration occur concurrently.
Implementation—places the latest software increment (an “operationalized” pro-
totype) into the operational environment. It should be noted that (1) the increment
may not be 100 percent complete or (2) changes may be requested as the incre-
ment is put into place. In either case, DSDM development work continues by
returning to the functional model iteration activity.
DSDM can be combined with XP (Section 3.4) to provide a combination approach
that defines a solid process model (the DSDM life cycle) with the nuts and bolts prac-
tices (XP) that are required to build software increments. In addition, the ASD con-
cepts of collaboration and self-organizing teams can be adapted to a combined
process model.
3.5.4
Crystal
Alistair Cockburn [Coc05] and Jim Highsmith [Hig02b] created the Crystal family of
agile methods15 in order to achieve a software development approach that puts a
premium on “maneuverability” during what Cockburn characterizes as “a resource-
limited, cooperative game of invention and communication, with a primary goal of
delivering useful, working software and a secondary goal of setting up for the next
game” [Coc02].
To achieve maneuverability, Cockburn and Highsmith have defined a set of
methodologies, each with core elements that are common to all, and roles, process
patterns, work products, and practice that are unique to each. The Crystal family is
actually a set of example agile processes that have been proven effective for differ-
ent types of projects. The intent is to allow agile teams to select the member of the
crystal family that is most appropriate for their project and environment.
CHAPTER 3
AGILE DEVELOPMENT
85
15 The name “crystal” is derived from the characteristics of geological crystals, each with its own
color, shape, and hardness.
Crystal is a family of
process models with
the same “genetic
code” but different
methods for adapting
to project
characteristics.
DSDM is a process
framework that can
adopt the tactics of
another agile approach
such as XP.

3.5.5
Feature Driven Development (FDD)
Feature Driven Development (FDD) was originally conceived by Peter Coad and his
colleagues [Coa99] as a practical process model for object-oriented software engi-
neering. Stephen Palmer and John Felsing [Pal02] have extended and improved
Coad’s work, describing an adaptive, agile process that can be applied to moderately
sized and larger software projects.
Like other agile approaches, FDD adopts a philosophy that (1) emphasizes col-
laboration among people on an FDD team; (2) manages problem and project
complexity using feature-based decomposition followed by the integration of
software increments, and (3) communication of technical detail using verbal,
graphical, and text-based means. FDD emphasizes software quality assurance
activities by encouraging an incremental development strategy, the use of design
and code inspections, the application of software quality assurance audits (Chap-
ter 16), the collection of metrics, and the use of patterns (for analysis, design, and
construction).
In the context of FDD, a feature “is a client-valued function that can be imple-
mented in two weeks or less” [Coa99]. The emphasis on the definition of features
provides the following benefits:
• Because features are small blocks of deliverable functionality, users can
describe them more easily; understand how they relate to one another more
readily; and better review them for ambiguity, error, or omissions.
• Features can be organized into a hierarchical business-related grouping.
• Since a feature is the FDD deliverable software increment, the team develops
operational features every two weeks.
• Because features are small, their design and code representations are easier
to inspect effectively.
• Project planning, scheduling, and tracking are driven by the feature
hierarchy, rather than an arbitrarily adopted software engineering 
task set.
Coad and his colleagues [Coa99] suggest the following template for defining a
feature:
<action> the <result> <by for of to> a(n) <object>
where an <object> is “a person, place, or thing (including roles, moments in time or
intervals of time, or catalog-entry-like descriptions).” Examples of features for an 
e-commerce application might be:
Add the product to shopping cart
Display the technical-specifications of the product
Store the shipping-information for the customer
86
PART ONE
THE SOFTWARE PROCESS
WebRef
A wide variety of
articles and
presentations on FDD
can be found at:
www.featuredrive
ndevelopment
.com/.

A feature set groups related features into business-related categories and is defined
[Coa99] as:
<action><-ing> a(n) <object>
For example: Making a product sale is a feature set that would encompass the fea-
tures noted earlier and others.
The FDD approach defines five “collaborating” [Coa99] framework activities (in
FDD these are called “processes”) as shown in Figure 3.5.
FDD provides greater emphasis on project management guidelines and tech-
niques than many other agile methods. As projects grow in size and complexity,
ad hoc project management is often inadequate. It is essential for developers, their
managers, and other stakeholders to understand project status—what accomplish-
ments have been made and problems have been encountered. If deadline pressure
is significant, it is critical to determine if software increments (features) are properly
scheduled. To accomplish this, FDD defines six milestones during the design and
implementation of a feature: “design walkthrough, design, design inspection, code,
code inspection, promote to build” [Coa99].
3.5.6
Lean Software Development (LSD)
Lean Software Development (LSD) has adapted the principles of lean manufacturing
to the world of software engineering. The lean principles that inspire the LSD process
can be summarized ([Pop03], [Pop06a]) as eliminate waste, build quality in, create
knowledge, defer commitment, deliver fast, respect people, and optimize the whole.
Each of these principles can be adapted to the software process. For example,
eliminate waste within the context of an agile software project can be interpreted
to mean [Das05]: (1) adding no extraneous features or functions, (2) assessing the
cost and schedule impact of any newly requested requirement, (3) removing any
superfluous process steps, (4) establishing mechanisms to improve the way team
members find information, (5) ensuring the testing finds as many errors as possible,
CHAPTER 3
AGILE DEVELOPMENT
87
Develop
an
Overall
Model
Build a
Features
List
Plan
By
Feature
Design
By
Feature
Build
By
Feature
(more shape
than content)
A list of features
grouped into sets
and subject areas
A development plan
Class owners
Feature Set Owners
A design
package
(sequences)
Completed
client-value
function
FIGURE 3.5
Feature Driven
Development
[Coa99] (with
permission)

(6) reducing the time required to request and get a decision that affects the software
or the process that is applied to create it, and (7) streamlining the manner in which
information is transmitted to all stakeholders involved in the process.
For a detailed discussion of LSD and pragmatic guidelines for implementing the
process, you should examine [Pop06a] and [Pop06b].
3.5.7
Agile Modeling (AM)
There are many situations in which software engineers must build large, business-
critical systems. The scope and complexity of such systems must be modeled so that
(1) all constituencies can better understand what needs to be accomplished, (2) the
problem can be partitioned effectively among the people who must solve it, and
(3) quality can be assessed as the system is being engineered and built.
Over the past 30 years, a wide variety of software engineering modeling methods
and notation have been proposed for analysis and design (both architectural and
component-level). These methods have merit, but they have proven to be difficult
to apply and challenging to sustain (over many projects). Part of the problem is the
“weight” of these modeling methods. By this I mean the volume of notation required,
the degree of formalism suggested, the sheer size of the models for large projects,
and the difficulty in maintaining the model(s) as changes occur. Yet analysis and de-
sign modeling have substantial benefit for large projects—if for no other reason than
to make these projects intellectually manageable. Is there an agile approach to soft-
ware engineering modeling that might provide an alternative?
At “The Official Agile Modeling Site,” Scott Ambler [Amb02a] describes agile mod-
eling (AM) in the following manner:
Agile Modeling (AM) is a practice-based methodology for effective modeling and documen-
tation of software-based systems. Simply put, Agile Modeling (AM) is a collection of values,
principles, and practices for modeling software that can be applied on a software develop-
ment project in an effective and light-weight manner. Agile models are more effective than
traditional models because they are just barely good, they don’t have to be perfect.
Agile modeling adopts all of the values that are consistent with the agile manifesto.
The agile modeling philosophy recognizes that an agile team must have the courage
to make decisions that may cause it to reject a design and refactor. The team must
also have the humility to recognize that technologists do not have all the answers and
that business experts and other stakeholders should be respected and embraced.
Although AM suggests a wide array of “core” and “supplementary” modeling prin-
ciples, those that make AM unique are [Amb02a]:
Model with a purpose.
A developer who uses AM should have a specific
goal (e.g., to communicate information to the customer or to help better un-
derstand some aspect of the software) in mind before creating the model.
Once the goal for the model is identified, the type of notation to be used and
level of detail required will be more obvious.
88
PART ONE
THE SOFTWARE PROCESS
WebRef
Comprehensive
information on agile
modeling can be found
at: www
.agilemodeling.com.
uote:
“I was in the drug
store the other day
trying to get a cold
medication . . . not
easy. There’s an
entire wall of
products you need.
You stand there
going, Well, this
one is quick acting
but this is long
lasting. . . . Which
is more important,
the present or the
future?”
Jerry Seinfeld

Use multiple models.
There are many different models and notations that
can be used to describe software. Only a small subset is essential for most
projects. AM suggests that to provide needed insight, each model should
present a different aspect of the system and only those models that provide
value to their intended audience should be used.
Travel light.
As software engineering work proceeds, keep only those mod-
els that will provide long-term value and jettison the rest. Every work product
that is kept must be maintained as changes occur. This represents work that
slows the team down. Ambler [Amb02a] notes that “Every time you decide to
keep a model you trade-off agility for the convenience of having that informa-
tion available to your team in an abstract manner (hence potentially enhanc-
ing communication within your team as well as with project stakeholders).”
Content is more important than representation.
Modeling should im-
part information to its intended audience. A syntactically perfect model that
imparts little useful content is not as valuable as a model with flawed nota-
tion that nevertheless provides valuable content for its audience.
Know the models and the tools you use to create them.
Understand
the strengths and weaknesses of each model and the tools that are used to
create it.
Adapt locally.
The modeling approach should be adapted to the needs of
the agile team.
A major segment of the software engineering community has adopted the Unified
Modeling Language (UML)16 as the preferred method for representing analysis and
design models. The Unified Process (Chapter 2) has been developed to provide a
framework for the application of UML. Scott Ambler [Amb06] has developed a sim-
plified version of the UP that integrates his agile modeling philosophy.
3.5.8
Agile Unified Process (AUP)
The Agile Unified Process (AUP) adopts a “serial in the large” and “iterative in the
small” [Amb06] philosophy for building computer-based systems. By adopting the
classic UP phased activities—inception, elaboration, construction, and transition—AUP
provides a serial overlay (i.e., a linear sequence of software engineering activities)
that enables a team to visualize the overall process flow for a software project. How-
ever, within each of the activities, the team iterates to achieve agility and to deliver
meaningful software increments to end users as rapidly as possible. Each AUP iter-
ation addresses the following activities [Amb06]: 
• Modeling. UML representations of the business and problem domains are
created. However, to stay agile, these models should be “just barely good
enough” [Amb06] to allow the team to proceed.
CHAPTER 3
AGILE DEVELOPMENT
89
“Traveling light” is an
appropriate philosophy
for all software engi-
neering work. Build
only those models that
provide value … no
more, no less.
16 A brief tutorial on UML is presented in Appendix 1.

• Implementation. Models are translated into source code.
• Testing. Like XP, the team designs and executes a series of tests to uncover
errors and ensure that the source code meets its requirements.
• Deployment. Like the generic process activity discussed in Chapters 1 and 2,
deployment in this context focuses on the delivery of a software increment
and the acquisition of feedback from end users.
• Configuration and project management. In the context of AUP, configuration
management (Chapter 22) addresses change management, risk manage-
ment, and the control of any persistent work products17 that are produced by
the team. Project management tracks and controls the progress of the team
and coordinates team activities.
• Environment management. Environment management coordinates a process
infrastructure that includes standards, tools, and other support technology
available to the team.
Although the AUP has historical and technical connections to the Unified Modeling
Language, it is important to note that UML modeling can be using in conjunction
with any of the agile process models described in Section 3.5.
90
PART ONE
THE SOFTWARE PROCESS
17 A persistent work product is a model or document or test case produced by the team that will be kept
for an indeterminate period of time. It will not be discarded once the software increment is
delivered.
18 Tools noted here do not represent an endorsement, but rather a sampling of tools in this category.
In most cases, tool names are trademarked by their respective developers.
Agile Development
Objective: The objective of agile development
tools is to assist in one or more aspects of agile
development with an emphasis on facilitating the rapid
generation of operational software. These tools can also
be used when prescriptive process models (Chapter 2) are
applied.
Mechanics: Tool mechanics vary. In general, agile tool
sets encompass automated support for project planning,
use case development and requirements gathering, rapid
design, code generation, and testing.
Representative Tools:18
Note: Because agile development is a hot topic, most
software tools vendors purport to sell tools that support 
the agile approach. The tools noted here have
characteristics that make them particularly useful for
agile projects.
OnTime, developed by Axosoft (www.axosoft.com),
provides agile process management support for
various technical activities within the process.
Ideogramic UML, developed by Ideogramic
(www.ideogramic.com) is a UML tool set
specifically developed for use within an agile 
process.
Together Tool Set, distributed by Borland
(www.borland.com), provides a tools suite that
supports many technical activities within XP and other
agile processes.
SOFTWARE TOOLS

3.6
A TOOL SET FOR THE AGILE PROCESS
Some proponents of the agile philosophy argue that automated software tools (e.g.,
design tools) should be viewed as a minor supplement to the team’s activities, and
not at all pivotal to the success of the team. However, Alistair Cockburn [Coc04] sug-
gests that tools can have a benefit and that “agile teams stress using tools that per-
mit the rapid flow of understanding. Some of those tools are social, starting even at
the hiring stage. Some tools are technological, helping distributed teams simulate
being physically present. Many tools are physical, allowing people to manipulate
them in workshops.”
Because acquiring the right people (hiring), team collaboration, stakeholder com-
munication, and indirect management are key elements in virtually all agile process
models, Cockburn argues that “tools” that address these issues are critical success
factors for agility. For example, a hiring “tool” might be the requirement to have a
prospective team member spend a few hours pair programming with an existing
member of the team. The “fit” can be assessed immediately.
Collaborative and communication “tools” are generally low tech and incorporate
any mechanism (“physical proximity, whiteboards, poster sheets, index cards, and
sticky notes” [Coc04]) that provides information and coordination among agile de-
velopers. Active communication is achieved via the team dynamics (e.g., pair pro-
gramming), while passive communication is achieved by “information radiators”
(e.g., a flat panel display that presents the overall status of different components of
an increment). Project management tools deemphasize the Gantt chart and replace
it with earned value charts or “graphs of tests created versus passed . . . other agile
tools are used to optimize the environment in which the agile team works (e.g., more
efficient meeting areas), improve the team culture by nurturing social interactions
(e.g., collocated teams), physical devices (e.g., electronic whiteboards), and process
enhancement (e.g., pair programming or time-boxing)” [Coc04].
Are any of these things really tools? They are, if they facilitate the work performed
by an agile team member and enhance the quality of the end product.
3.7
SUMMARY
In a modern economy, market conditions change rapidly, customer and end-user
needs evolve, and new competitive threats emerge without warning. Practitioners
must approach software engineering in a manner that allows them to remain agile—
to define maneuverable, adaptive, lean processes that can accommodate the needs
of modern business.
An agile philosophy for software engineering stresses four key issues: the impor-
tance of self-organizing teams that have control over the work they perform, com-
munication and collaboration between team members and between practitioners
and their customers, a recognition that change represents an opportunity, and
CHAPTER 3
AGILE DEVELOPMENT
91
The “tool set” that
supports agile
processes focuses
more on people issues
than it does on
technology issues.

MODELING
95
P A R T
Two
I
n this part of Software Engineering: A Practitioner’s Approach
you’ll learn about the principles, concepts, and methods that are
used to create high-quality requirements and design models.
These questions are addressed in the chapters that follow:
•
What concepts and principles guide software engineering
practice?
•
What is requirements engineering and what are the underly-
ing concepts that lead to good requirements analysis?
•
How is the requirements model created and what are its
elements?
•
What are the elements of a good design?
•
How does architectural design establish a framework for all
other design actions and what models are used?
•
How do we design high-quality software components?
•
What concepts, models, and methods are applied as a user
interface is designed?
•
What is pattern-based design?
•
What specialized strategies and methods are used to design
WebApps?
Once these questions are answered you’ll be better prepared to
apply software engineering practice.

CHAPTER 4
PRINCIPLES THAT GUIDE PRACTICE
97
A dark image of software engineering practice to be sure, but upon reflection,
many of the readers of this book will be able to relate to it.
People who create computer software practice the art or craft or discipline1 that
is software engineering. But what is software engineering “practice”? In a generic
sense, practice is a collection of concepts, principles, methods, and tools that a soft-
ware engineer calls upon on a daily basis. Practice allows managers to manage soft-
ware projects and software engineers to build computer programs. Practice
populates a software process model with the necessary technical and management
how-to’s to get the job done. Practice transforms a haphazard unfocused approach
into something that is more organized, more effective, and more likely to achieve
success.
Various aspects of software engineering practice will be examined throughout the
remainder of this book. In this chapter, my focus is on principles and concepts that
guide software engineering practice in general.
4.1
SOFTWARE ENGINEERING KNOWLEDGE
In an editorial published in IEEE Software a decade ago, Steve McConnell [McC99]
made the following comment:
Many software practitioners think of software engineering knowledge almost exclusively
as knowledge of specific technologies: Java, Perl, html, C, Linux, Windows NT, and so
on. Knowledge of specific technology details is necessary to perform computer program-
ming. If someone assigns you to write a program in C, you have to know something
about C to get your program to work.
You often hear people say that software development knowledge has a 3-year 
half-life: half of what you need to know today will be obsolete within 3 years. In the
domain of technology-related knowledge, that’s probably about right. But there is
another kind of software development knowledge—a kind that I think of as “software
engineering principles”—that does not have a three-year half-life. These software engi-
neering principles are likely to serve a professional programmer throughout his or her
career.
McConnell goes on to argue that the body of software engineering knowledge
(circa the year 2000) had evolved to a “stable core” that he estimated represented
about “75 percent of the knowledge needed to develop a complex system.” But what
resides within this stable core?
As McConnell indicates, core principles—the elemental ideas that guide software
engineers in the work that they do—now provide a foundation from which software
engineering models, methods, and tools can be applied and evaluated.
1
Some writers argue for one of these terms to the exclusion of the others. In reality, software
engineering is all three.

4.2
CORE PRINCIPLES
Software engineering is guided by a collection of core principles that help in the ap-
plication of a meaningful software process and the execution of effective software
engineering methods. At the process level, core principles establish a philosophical
foundation that guides a software team as it performs framework and umbrella ac-
tivities, navigates the process flow, and produces a set of software engineering work
products. At the level of practice, core principles establish a collection of values and
rules that serve as a guide as you analyze a problem, design a solution, implement
and test the solution, and ultimately deploy the software in the user community.
In Chapter 1, I identified a set of general principles that span software engineering
process and practice: (1) provide value to end users, (2) keep it simple, (3) maintain
the vision (of the product and the project), (4) recognize that others consume (and
must understand) what you produce, (5) be open to the future, (6) plan ahead for
reuse, and (7) think! Although these general principles are important, they are char-
acterized at such a high level of abstraction that they are sometimes difficult to trans-
late into day-to-day software engineering practice. In the subsections that follow, I
take a more detailed look at the core principles that guide process and practice.
4.2.1
Principles That Guide Process
In Part 1 of this book I discussed the importance of the software process and
described the many different process models that have been proposed for software
engineering work. Regardless of whether a model is linear or iterative, prescriptive
or agile, it can be characterized using the generic process framework that is appli-
cable for all process models. The following set of core principles can be applied to
the framework, and by extension, to every software process.
Principle 1. Be agile.
Whether the process model you choose is prescrip-
tive or agile, the basic tenets of agile development should govern your
approach. Every aspect of the work you do should emphasize economy of
action—keep your technical approach as simple as possible, keep the work
products you produce as concise as possible, and make decisions locally
whenever possible.
Principle 2. Focus on quality at every step.
The exit condition for every
process activity, action, and task should focus on the quality of the work
product that has been produced.
Principle 3. Be ready to adapt.
Process is not a religious experience, and
dogma has no place in it. When necessary, adapt your approach to con-
straints imposed by the problem, the people, and the project itself.
Principle 4. Build an effective team.
Software engineering process and
practice are important, but the bottom line is people. Build a self-organizing
team that has mutual trust and respect.
98
PART TWO
MODELING
uote:
“In theory there is
no difference
between theory and
practice. But, in
practice, there is.”
Jan van de
Snepscheut
Every project and
every team is unique.
That means that you
must adapt your
process to best fit your
needs.

Principle 5. Establish mechanisms for communication and coordination.
Projects fail because important information falls into the cracks and/or
stakeholders fail to coordinate their efforts to create a successful end prod-
uct. These are management issues and they must be addressed.
Principle 6. Manage change.
The approach may be either formal or infor-
mal, but mechanisms must be established to manage the way changes are
requested, assessed, approved, and implemented.
Principle 7. Assess risk.
Lots of things can go wrong as software is being
developed. It’s essential that you establish contingency plans.
Principle 8. Create work products that provide value for others.
Create only those work products that provide value for other process
activities, actions, or tasks. Every work product that is produced as part of
software engineering practice will be passed on to someone else. A list of
required functions and features will be passed along to the person (people)
who will develop a design, the design will be passed along to those who
generate code, and so on. Be sure that the work product imparts the necessary
information without ambiguity or omission.
Part 4 of this book focuses on project and process management issues and
considers various aspects of each of these principles in some detail.
4.2.2
Principles That Guide Practice
Software engineering practice has a single overriding goal—to deliver on-time, high-
quality, operational software that contains functions and features that meet the
needs of all stakeholders. To achieve this goal, you should adopt a set of core prin-
ciples that guide your technical work. These principles have merit regardless of the
analysis and design methods that you apply, the construction techniques (e.g., pro-
gramming language, automated tools) that you use, or the verification and valida-
tion approach that you choose. The following set of core principles are fundamental
to the practice of software engineering:
Principle 1. Divide and conquer.
Stated in a more technical manner,
analysis and design should always emphasize separation of concerns (SoC). A
large problem is easier to solve if it is subdivided into a collection of elements
(or concerns). Ideally, each concern delivers distinct functionality that can be
developed, and in some cases validated, independently of other concerns.
Principle 2. Understand the use of abstraction.
At its core, an abstrac-
tion is a simplification of some complex element of a system used to commu-
nicate meaning in a single phrase. When I use the abstraction spreadsheet, it
is assumed that you understand what a spreadsheet is, the general structure
of content that a spreadsheet presents, and the typical functions that can be
applied to it. In software engineering practice, you use many different levels
CHAPTER 4
PRINCIPLES THAT GUIDE PRACTICE
99
uote:
“The truth of the
matter is that you
always know the
right thing to do.
The hard part is
doing it.”
General H.
Norman
Schwarzkopf
Problems are easier to
solve when they are
subdivided into
separate concerns,
each distinct,
individually solvable,
and verifiable.

of abstraction, each imparting or implying meaning that must be communi-
cated. In analysis and design work, a software team normally begins with
models that represent high levels of abstraction (e.g., a spreadsheet) and
slowly refines those models into lower levels of abstraction (e.g., a column
or the SUM function).
Joel Spolsky [Spo02] suggests that “all non-trivial abstractions, to some
degree, are leaky.” The intent of an abstraction is to eliminate the need to
communicate details. But sometimes, problematic effects precipitated by
these details “leak” through. Without an understanding of the details, the
cause of a problem cannot be easily diagnosed.
Principle 3. Strive for consistency.
Whether it’s creating a requirements
model, developing a software design, generating source code, or creating
test cases, the principle of consistency suggests that a familiar context makes
software easier to use. As an example, consider the design of a user interface
for a WebApp. Consistent placement of menu options, the use of a consistent
color scheme, and the consistent use of recognizable icons all help to make
the interface ergonomically sound.
Principle 4. Focus on the transfer of information.
Software is about
information transfer—from a database to an end user, from a legacy system
to a WebApp, from an end user into a graphic user interface (GUI), from an
operating system to an application, from one software component to an-
other—the list is almost endless. In every case, information flows across an
interface, and as a consequence, there are opportunities for error, or omis-
sion, or ambiguity. The implication of this principle is that you must pay spe-
cial attention to the analysis, design, construction, and testing of interfaces.
Principle 5. Build software that exhibits effective modularity.
Separation of concerns (Principle 1) establishes a philosophy for software.
Modularity provides a mechanism for realizing the philosophy. Any complex
system can be divided into modules (components), but good software engi-
neering practice demands more. Modularity must be effective. That is, each
module should focus exclusively on one well-constrained aspect of the
system—it should be cohesive in its function and/or constrained in the
content it represents. Additionally, modules should be interconnected in a
relatively simple manner—each module should exhibit low coupling to other
modules, to data sources, and to other environmental aspects.
Principle 6. Look for patterns.
Brad Appleton [App00] suggests that: 
The goal of patterns within the software community is to create a body of literature
to help software developers resolve recurring problems encountered throughout
all of software development. Patterns help create a shared language for commu-
nicating insight and experience about these problems and their solutions. Formally
codifying these solutions and their relationships lets us successfully capture the
100
PART TWO
MODELING
Use patterns 
(Chapter 12) to
capture knowledge and
experience for future
generations of
software engineers.

body of knowledge which defines our understanding of good architectures that
meet the needs of their users.
Principle 7. When possible, represent the problem and its solution
from a number of different perspectives.
When a problem and its solution
are examined from a number of different perspectives, it is more likely that
greater insight will be achieved and that errors and omissions will be uncov-
ered. For example, a requirements model can be represented using a data-
oriented viewpoint, a function-oriented viewpoint, or a behavioral viewpoint
(Chapters 6 and 7). Each provides a different view of the problem and its
requirements.
Principle 8. Remember that someone will maintain the software.
Over
the long term, software will be corrected as defects are uncovered, adapted
as its environment changes, and enhanced as stakeholders request more
capabilities. These maintenance activities can be facilitated if solid software
engineering practice is applied throughout the software process.
These principles are not all you’ll need to build high-quality software, but they do
establish a foundation for every software engineering method discussed in this book.
4.3
PRINCIPLES THAT GUIDE EACH FRAMEWORK ACTIVITY
In the sections that follow I consider principles that have a strong bearing on the suc-
cess of each generic framework activity defined as part of the software process. In
many cases, the principles that are discussed for each of the framework activities are
a refinement of the principles presented in Section 4.2. They are simply core princi-
ples stated at a lower level of abstraction.
4.3.1
Communication Principles
Before customer requirements can be analyzed, modeled, or specified they must
be gathered through the communication activity. A customer has a problem that may
be amenable to a computer-based solution. You respond to the customer’s request
for help. Communication has begun. But the road from communication to under-
standing is often full of potholes.
Effective communication (among technical peers, with the customer and other
stakeholders, and with project managers) is among the most challenging activities
that you will confront. In this context, I discuss communication principles as they
apply to customer communication. However, many of the principles apply equally to
all forms of communication that occur within a software project.
Principle 1. Listen.
Try to focus on the speaker’s words, rather than formu-
lating your response to those words. Ask for clarification if something is un-
clear, but avoid constant interruptions. Never become contentious in your words
or actions (e.g., rolling your eyes or shaking your head) as a person is talking.
CHAPTER 4
PRINCIPLES THAT GUIDE PRACTICE
101
uote:
“The ideal engineer
is a composite. . . .
He is not a
scientist, he is not a
mathematician, he
is not a sociologist
or a writer; but he
may use the
knowledge and
techniques of any
or all of these
disciplines in
solving engineering
problems.”
N. W.
Dougherty

Principle 2. Prepare before you communicate.
Spend the time to under-
stand the problem before you meet with others. If necessary, do some re-
search to understand business domain jargon. If you have responsibility for
conducting a meeting, prepare an agenda in advance of the meeting.
Principle 3. Someone should facilitate the activity.
Every communica-
tion meeting should have a leader (a facilitator) to keep the conversation
moving in a productive direction, (2) to mediate any conflict that does occur,
and (3) to ensure than other principles are followed.
Principle 4. Face-to-face communication is best.
But it usually works
better when some other representation of the relevant information is present.
For example, a participant may create a drawing or a “strawman” document
that serves as a focus for discussion.
Principle 5. Take notes and document decisions.
Things have a way of
falling into the cracks. Someone participating in the communication should
serve as a “recorder” and write down all important points and decisions.
Principle 6. Strive for collaboration.
Collaboration and consensus occur
when the collective knowledge of members of the team is used to
describe product or system functions or features. Each small collaboration
serves to build trust among team members and creates a common goal for
the team.
Principle 7. Stay focused; modularize your discussion.
The more
people involved in any communication, the more likely that discussion will
bounce from one topic to the next. The facilitator should keep the conversation
modular, leaving one topic only after it has been resolved (however, see
Principle 9).
Principle 8. If something is unclear, draw a picture. Verbal communica-
tion goes only so far. A sketch or drawing can often provide clarity when
words fail to do the job.
Principle 9. (a) Once you agree to something, move on. (b) If you can’t
agree to something, move on. (c) If a feature or function is unclear
and cannot be clarified at the moment, move on.
Communication, like
any software engineering activity, takes time. Rather than iterating endlessly,
the people who participate should recognize that many topics require discus-
sion (see Principle 2) and that “moving on” is sometimes the best way to
achieve communication agility.
Principle 10. Negotiation is not a contest or a game. It works best
when both parties win.
There are many instances in which you and other
stakeholders must negotiate functions and features, priorities, and delivery
dates. If the team has collaborated well, all parties have a common goal. Still,
negotiation will demand compromise from all parties.
102
PART TWO
MODELING
Before communicating
be sure you under-
stand the point of view
of the other party,
know a bit about his or
her needs, and then
listen.
uote:
“Plain questions
and plain answers
make the shortest
road to most
perplexities.”
Mark Twain
What
happens if I
can’t come to an
agreement with
the customer on
some project-
related issue?
?

CHAPTER 4
PRINCIPLES THAT GUIDE PRACTICE
103
Communication Mistakes
The scene: Software engineering
team workspace
The players: Jamie Lazar, software team member;
Vinod Raman, software team member; Ed Robbins,
software team member.
The conversation:
Ed: “What have you heard about this SafeHome
project?”
Vinod: “The kick-off meeting is scheduled for next
week.”
Jamie: “I’ve already done a little bit of investigation, but
it didn’t go well.”
Ed: “What do you mean?”
Jamie: “Well, I gave Lisa Perez a call. She’s the
marketing honcho on this thing.”
Vinod: “And . . . ?”
Jamie: “I wanted her to tell me about SafeHome features
and functions . . . that sort of thing. Instead, she began
asking me questions about security systems, surveillance
systems . . . I’m no expert.”
Vinod: “What does that tell you?”
(Jamie shrugs.)
Vinod: “That marketing will need us to act as consultants
and that we’d better do some homework on this product
area before our kick-off meeting. Doug said that he
wanted us to ‘collaborate’ with our customer, so we’d
better learn how to do that.”
Ed: “Probably would have been better to stop by her office.
Phone calls just don’t work as well for this sort of thing.”
Jamie: “You’re both right. We’ve got to get our act
together or our early communications will be a struggle.”
Vinod: “I saw Doug reading a book on ‘requirements
engineering.’ I’ll bet that lists some principles of good
communication. I’m going to borrow it from him.”
Jamie: “Good idea . . . then you can teach us.”
Vinod (smiling): “Yeah, right.”
SAFEHOME
4.3.2
Planning Principles
The communication activity helps you to define your overall goals and objectives
(subject, of course, to change as time passes). However, understanding these goals
and objectives is not the same as defining a plan for getting there. The planning
activity encompasses a set of management and technical practices that enable the
software team to define a road map as it travels toward its strategic goal and tacti-
cal objectives.
The Difference Between Customers and End Users
Software engineers communicate with many
different stakeholders, but customers and end
users have the most significant impact on the technical
work that follows. In some cases the customer and the end
user are one and the same, but for many projects, the
customer and the end user are different people, working
for different managers, in different business organizations.
A customer is the person or group who (1) originally
requested the software to be built, (2) defines overall
business objectives for the software, (3) provides basic
product requirements, and (4) coordinates funding for the
project. In a product or system business, the customer
is often the marketing department. In an information
technology (IT) environment, the customer might be a
business component or department.
An end user is the person or group who (1) will
actually use the software that is built to achieve some
business purpose and (2) will define operational 
details of the software so the business purpose can be
achieved.
INFO

Try as we might, it’s impossible to predict exactly how a software project will
evolve. There is no easy way to determine what unforeseen technical problems will
be encountered, what important information will remain undiscovered until late in
the project, what misunderstandings will occur, or what business issues will change.
And yet, a good software team must plan its approach.
There are many different planning philosophies.2 Some people are “minimalists,”
arguing that change often obviates the need for a detailed plan. Others are “tradi-
tionalists,” arguing that the plan provides an effective road map and the more detail
it has, the less likely the team will become lost. Still others are “agilists,” arguing that
a quick “planning game” may be necessary, but that the road map will emerge as
“real work” on the software begins.
What to do? On many projects, overplanning is time consuming and fruitless (too
many things change), but underplanning is a recipe for chaos. Like most things in
life, planning should be conducted in moderation, enough to provide useful guidance
for the team—no more, no less. Regardless of the rigor with which planning is con-
ducted, the following principles always apply:
Principle 1. Understand the scope of the project.
It’s impossible to use
a road map if you don’t know where you’re going. Scope provides the soft-
ware team with a destination.
Principle 2. Involve stakeholders in the planning activity.
Stakeholders
define priorities and establish project constraints. To accommodate these
realities, software engineers must often negotiate order of delivery, time
lines, and other project-related issues.
Principle 3. Recognize that planning is iterative.
A project plan is never
engraved in stone. As work begins, it is very likely that things will change. As
a consequence, the plan must be adjusted to accommodate these changes. In
addition, iterative, incremental process models dictate replanning after the
delivery of each software increment based on feedback received from users.
Principle 4. Estimate based on what you know.
The intent of estimation
is to provide an indication of effort, cost, and task duration, based on the
team’s current understanding of the work to be done. If information is vague
or unreliable, estimates will be equally unreliable.
Principle 5. Consider risk as you define the plan.
If you have identified
risks that have high impact and high probability, contingency planning is
necessary. In addition, the project plan (including the schedule) should be
adjusted to accommodate the likelihood that one or more of these risks will
occur.
104
PART TWO
MODELING
uote:
“In preparing for
battle I have
always found that
plans are useless,
but planning is
indispensable.”
General Dwight
D. Eisenhower
WebRef
An excellent repository
of planning and project
management
information can be
found at
www.4pm.com/
repository.htm.
2
A detailed discussion of software project planning and management is presented in Part 4 of this
book.
uote:
“Success is more
a function of
consistent common
sense than it is of
genius.”
An Wang

Principle 6. Be realistic.
People don’t work 100 percent of every day.
Noise always enters into any human communication. Omissions and
ambiguity are facts of life. Change will occur. Even the best software
engineers make mistakes. These and other realities should be considered
as a project plan is established.
Principle 7. Adjust granularity as you define the plan.
Granularity
refers to the level of detail that is introduced as a project plan is developed.
A “high-granularity” plan provides significant work task detail that is planned
over relatively short time increments (so that tracking and control occur
frequently). A “low-granularity” plan provides broader work tasks that are
planned over longer time periods. In general, granularity moves from high to
low as the project time line moves away from the current date. Over the
next few weeks or months, the project can be planned in significant detail.
Activities that won’t occur for many months do not require high granularity
(too much can change).
Principle 8. Define how you intend to ensure quality.
The plan should
identify how the software team intends to ensure quality. If technical
reviews3 are to be conducted, they should be scheduled. If pair programming
(Chapter 3) is to be used during construction, it should be explicitly defined
within the plan.
Principle 9. Describe how you intend to accommodate change.
Even
the best planning can be obviated by uncontrolled change. You should iden-
tify how changes are to be accommodated as software engineering work
proceeds. For example, can the customer request a change at any time? If a
change is requested, is the team obliged to implement it immediately? How is
the impact and cost of the change assessed?
Principle 10. Track the plan frequently and make adjustments as re-
quired.
Software projects fall behind schedule one day at a time. Therefore,
it makes sense to track progress on a daily basis, looking for problem areas
and situations in which scheduled work does not conform to actual work
conducted. When slippage is encountered, the plan is adjusted accordingly.
To be most effective, everyone on the software team should participate in the
planning activity. Only then will team members “sign up” to the plan.
4.3.3
Modeling Principles
We create models to gain a better understanding of the actual entity to be built. When
the entity is a physical thing (e.g., a building, a plane, a machine), we can build a
model that is identical in form and shape but smaller in scale. However, when the
CHAPTER 4
PRINCIPLES THAT GUIDE PRACTICE
105
The term granularity
refers to the detail
with which some
element of planning is
represented or
conducted.
3
Technical reviews are discussed in Chapter 15.

entity to be built is software, our model must take a different form. It must be capa-
ble of representing the information that software transforms, the architecture and
functions that enable the transformation to occur, the features that users desire, and
the behavior of the system as the transformation is taking place. Models must
accomplish these objectives at different levels of abstraction—first depicting the soft-
ware from the customer’s viewpoint and later representing the software at a more
technical level.
In software engineering work, two classes of models can be created: require-
ments models and design models. Requirements models (also called analysis models)
represent customer requirements by depicting the software in three different do-
mains: the information domain, the functional domain, and the behavioral domain.
Design models represent characteristics of the software that help practitioners to
construct it effectively: the architecture, the user interface, and component-level
detail.
In their book on agile modeling, Scott Ambler and Ron Jeffries [Amb02b] define a
set of modeling principles4 that are intended for those who use the agile process
model (Chapter 3) but are appropriate for all software engineers who perform mod-
eling actions and tasks: 
Principle 1. The primary goal of the software team is to build soft-
ware, not create models.
Agility means getting software to the customer
in the fastest possible time. Models that make this happen are worth creat-
ing, but models that slow the process down or provide little new insight
should be avoided.
Principle 2. Travel light—don’t create more models than you need.
Every model that is created must be kept up-to-date as changes occur. More
importantly, every new model takes time that might otherwise be spent on
construction (coding and testing). Therefore, create only those models that
make it easier and faster to construct the software.
Principle 3. Strive to produce the simplest model that will describe the
problem or the software.
Don’t overbuild the software [Amb02b]. By
keeping models simple, the resultant software will also be simple. The result
is software that is easier to integrate, easier to test, and easier to maintain (to
change). In addition, simple models are easier for members of the software
team to understand and critique, resulting in an ongoing form of feedback
that optimizes the end result.
Principle 4. Build models in a way that makes them amenable to change.
Assume that your models will change, but in making this assumption don’t
106
PART TWO
MODELING
Requirements models
represent customer
requirements. Design
models provide a
concrete specification
for the construction of
the software.
4
The principles noted in this section have been abbreviated and rephrased for the purposes of this
book.
The intent of any
model is to communi-
cate information. To
accomplish this, use a
consistent format.
Assume that you won’t
be there to explain the
model. It should stand
on its own.

get sloppy. For example, since requirements will change, there is a tendency
to give requirements models short shrift. Why? Because you know that they’ll
change anyway. The problem with this attitude is that without a reasonably
complete requirements model, you’ll create a design (design model) that will
invariably miss important functions and features.
Principle 5. Be able to state an explicit purpose for each model that
is created.
Every time you create a model, ask yourself why you’re doing
so. If you can’t provide solid justification for the existence of the model,
don’t spend time on it.
Principle 6. Adapt the models you develop to the system at hand.
It
may be necessary to adapt model notation or rules to the application; for ex-
ample, a video game application might require a different modeling technique
than real-time, embedded software that controls an automobile engine.
Principle 7. Try to build useful models, but forget about building per-
fect models.
When building requirements and design models, a software
engineer reaches a point of diminishing returns. That is, the effort required to
make the model absolutely complete and internally consistent is not worth
the benefits of these properties. Am I suggesting that modeling should be
sloppy or low quality? The answer is “no.” But modeling should be conducted
with an eye to the next software engineering steps. Iterating endlessly to
make a model “perfect” does not serve the need for agility.
Principle 8. Don’t become dogmatic about the syntax of the model. If
it communicates content successfully, representation is secondary.
Although everyone on a software team should try to use consistent notation
during modeling, the most important characteristic of the model is to com-
municate information that enables the next software engineering task. If a
model does this successfully, incorrect syntax can be forgiven.
Principle 9. If your instincts tell you a model isn’t right even though it
seems okay on paper, you probably have reason to be concerned.
If
you are an experienced software engineer, trust your instincts. Software
work teaches many lessons—some of them on a subconscious level. If some-
thing tells you that a design model is doomed to fail (even though you can’t
prove it explicitly), you have reason to spend additional time examining the
model or developing a different one.
Principle 10. Get feedback as soon as you can.
Every model should be
reviewed by members of the software team. The intent of these reviews is to
provide feedback that can be used to correct modeling mistakes, change mis-
interpretations, and add features or functions that were inadvertently omitted.
Requirements modeling principles.
Over the past three decades, a large num-
ber of requirements modeling methods have been developed. Investigators have
CHAPTER 4
PRINCIPLES THAT GUIDE PRACTICE
107

identified requirements analysis problems and their causes and have developed
a variety of modeling notations and corresponding sets of heuristics to overcome
them. Each analysis method has a unique point of view. However, all analysis meth-
ods are related by a set of operational principles:
Principle 1. The information domain of a problem must be represented
and understood.
The information domain encompasses the data that flow
into the system (from end users, other systems, or external devices), the data
that flow out of the system (via the user interface, network interfaces, reports,
graphics, and other means), and the data stores that collect and organize per-
sistent data objects (i.e., data that are maintained permanently).
Principle 2. The functions that the software performs must be defined.
Software functions provide direct benefit to end users and also provide inter-
nal support for those features that are user visible. Some functions transform
data that flow into the system. In other cases, functions effect some level of
control over internal software processing or external system elements. Func-
tions can be described at many different levels of abstraction, ranging from a
general statement of purpose to a detailed description of the processing
elements that must be invoked.
Principle 3. The behavior of the software (as a consequence of external
events) must be represented.
The behavior of computer software is driven
by its interaction with the external environment. Input provided by end users,
control data provided by an external system, or monitoring data collected
over a network all cause the software to behave in a specific way.
Principle 4. The models that depict information, function, and behavior
must be partitioned in a manner that uncovers detail in a layered (or
hierarchical) fashion.
Requirements modeling is the first step in software
engineering problem solving. It allows you to better understand the problem
and establishes a basis for the solution (design). Complex problems are difficult
to solve in their entirety. For this reason, you should use a divide-and-conquer
strategy. A large, complex problem is divided into subproblems until each sub-
problem is relatively easy to understand. This concept is called partitioning or
separation of concerns, and it is a key strategy in requirements modeling.
Principle 5. The analysis task should move from essential information
toward implementation detail.
Requirements modeling begins by describ-
ing the problem from the end-user’s perspective. The “essence” of the
problem is described without any consideration of how a solution will be
implemented. For example, a video game requires that the player “instruct”
its protagonist on what direction to proceed as she moves into a dangerous
maze. That is the essence of the problem. Implementation detail (normally
described as part of the design model) indicates how the essence will be
implemented. For the video game, voice input might be used. Alternatively,
108
PART TWO
MODELING
Analysis modeling
focuses on three
attributes of software:
information to be
processed, function to
be delivered, and
behavior to be
exhibited.
uote:
“The engineer’s
first problem in
any design
situation is to
discover what the
problem really is.”
Author unknown

a keyboard command might be typed, a joystick (or mouse) might be pointed
in a specific direction, or a motion-sensitive device might be waved in the air.
By applying these principles, a software engineer approaches a problem system-
atically. But how are these principles applied in practice? This question will be an-
swered in Chapters 5 through 7.
Design Modeling Principles.
The software design model is analogous to an
architect’s plans for a house. It begins by representing the totality of the thing to be
built (e.g., a three-dimensional rendering of the house) and slowly refines the thing
to provide guidance for constructing each detail (e.g., the plumbing layout). Similarly,
the design model that is created for software provides a variety of different views of
the system.
There is no shortage of methods for deriving the various elements of a software
design. Some methods are data driven, allowing the data structure to dictate the pro-
gram architecture and the resultant processing components. Others are pattern
driven, using information about the problem domain (the requirements model) to de-
velop architectural styles and processing patterns. Still others are object oriented,
using problem domain objects as the driver for the creation of data structures and
the methods that manipulate them. Yet all embrace a set of design principles that can
be applied regardless of the method that is used:
Principle 1. Design should be traceable to the requirements model.
The requirements model describes the information domain of the problem,
user-visible functions, system behavior, and a set of requirements classes
that package business objects with the methods that service them. The de-
sign model translates this information into an architecture, a set of subsys-
tems that implement major functions, and a set of components that are the
realization of requirements classes. The elements of the design model should
be traceable to the requirements model.
Principle 2. Always consider the architecture of the system to be built.
Software architecture (Chapter 9) is the skeleton of the system to be built. It
affects interfaces, data structures, program control flow and behavior, the
manner in which testing can be conducted, the maintainability of the result-
ant system, and much more. For all of these reasons, design should start with
architectural considerations. Only after the architecture has been established
should component-level issues be considered.
Principle 3. Design of data is as important as design of processing
functions.
Data design is an essential element of architectural design. The
manner in which data objects are realized within the design cannot be left to
chance. A well-structured data design helps to simplify program flow, makes
the design and implementation of software components easier, and makes
overall processing more efficient.
CHAPTER 4
PRINCIPLES THAT GUIDE PRACTICE
109
uote:
“See first that the
design is wise
and just: that
ascertained, pursue
it resolutely; do not
for one repulse
forego the purpose
that you resolved
to effect.”
William
Shakespeare
WebRef
Insightful comments
on the design process,
along with a discussion
of design aesthetics,
can be found at
cs.wwc.edu/
~aabyan/Design/.

Principle 4. Interfaces (both internal and external) must be designed
with care.
The manner in which data flows between the components of a
system has much to do with processing efficiency, error propagation, and
design simplicity. A well-designed interface makes integration easier and
assists the tester in validating component functions.
Principle 5. User interface design should be tuned to the needs of the
end user. However, in every case, it should stress ease of use. The
user interface is the visible manifestation of the software. No matter how
sophisticated its internal functions, no matter how comprehensive its data
structures, no matter how well designed its architecture, a poor interface
design often leads to the perception that the software is “bad.”
Principle 6. Component-level design should be functionally independ-
ent.
Functional independence is a measure of the “single-mindedness” of a
software component. The functionality that is delivered by a component
should be cohesive—that is, it should focus on one and only one function or
subfunction.5
Principle 7. Components should be loosely coupled to one another
and to the external environment.
Coupling is achieved in many ways—
via a component interface, by messaging, through global data. As the level of
coupling increases, the likelihood of error propagation also increases and the
overall maintainability of the software decreases. Therefore, component cou-
pling should be kept as low as is reasonable.
Principle 8. Design representations (models) should be easily under-
standable.
The purpose of design is to communicate information to practi-
tioners who will generate code, to those who will test the software, and to
others who may maintain the software in the future. If the design is difficult
to understand, it will not serve as an effective communication medium.
Principle 9. The design should be developed iteratively. With each
iteration, the designer should strive for greater simplicity.
Like almost
all creative activities, design occurs iteratively. The first iterations work to
refine the design and correct errors, but later iterations should strive to make
the design as simple as is possible.
When these design principles are properly applied, you create a design that exhibits
both external and internal quality factors [Mye78]. External quality factors are those
properties of the software that can be readily observed by users (e.g., speed, reliability,
correctness, usability). Internal quality factors are of importance to software engineers.
They lead to a high-quality design from the technical perspective. To achieve internal
quality factors, the designer must understand basic design concepts (Chapter 8).
110
PART TWO
MODELING
uote:
“The differences
are not minor—
they are rather like
the differences
between Salieri
and Mozart. Study
after study shows
that the very best
designers produce
structures that are
faster, smaller,
simpler, clearer,
and produced with
less effort.”
Frederick P.
Brooks
5
Additional discussion of cohesion can be found in Chapter 8.

4.3.4
Construction Principles
The construction activity encompasses a set of coding and testing tasks that lead to
operational software that is ready for delivery to the customer or end user. In mod-
ern software engineering work, coding may be (1) the direct creation of program-
ming language source code (e.g., Java), (2) the automatic generation of source code
using an intermediate design-like representation of the component to be built, or
(3) the automatic generation of executable code using a “fourth-generation pro-
gramming language” (e.g., Visual C).
The initial focus of testing is at the component level, often called unit testing. Other
levels of testing include (1) integration testing (conducted as the system is con-
structed), validation testing that assesses whether requirements have been met for
the complete system (or software increment), and (3) acceptance testing that is con-
ducted by the customer in an effort to exercise all required features and functions.
The following set of fundamental principles and concepts are applicable to coding
and testing:
Coding Principles.
The principles that guide the coding task are closely aligned
with programming style, programming languages, and programming methods.
However, there are a number of fundamental principles that can be stated:
Preparation principles: Before you write one line of code, be sure you
• Understand of the problem you’re trying to solve.
• Understand basic design principles and concepts.
• Pick a programming language that meets the needs of the software to be
built and the environment in which it will operate.
• Select a programming environment that provides tools that will make your
work easier.
• Create a set of unit tests that will be applied once the component you code is
completed.
Programming principles: As you begin writing code, be sure you
• Constrain your algorithms by following structured programming [Boh00]
practice.
• Consider the use of pair programming.
• Select data structures that will meet the needs of the design.
• Understand the software architecture and create interfaces that are
consistent with it.
• Keep conditional logic as simple as possible.
• Create nested loops in a way that makes them easily testable.
• Select meaningful variable names and follow other local coding standards.
CHAPTER 4
PRINCIPLES THAT GUIDE PRACTICE
111
uote:
“For much of my
life, I have been a
software voyeur,
peeking furtively
at other people’s
dirty code.
Occasionally, I find
a real jewel, a well-
structured program
written in a
consistent style,
free of kludges,
developed so that
each component is
simple and
organized, and
designed so that
the product is easy
to change.”
David Parnas
Avoid developing an
elegant program that
solves the wrong
problem. Pay particular
attention to the first
preparation principle.

• Write code that is self-documenting.
• Create a visual layout (e.g., indentation and blank lines) that aids
understanding.
Validation Principles: After you’ve completed your first coding pass, 
be sure you
• Conduct a code walkthrough when appropriate.
• Perform unit tests and correct errors you’ve uncovered.
• Refactor the code.
More books have been written about programming (coding) and the principles and
concepts that guide it than about any other topic in the software process. Books on
the subject include early works on programming style [Ker78], practical software
construction [McC04], programming pearls [Ben99], the art of programming
[Knu98], pragmatic programming issues [Hun99], and many, many other subjects.
A comprehensive discussion of these principles and concepts is beyond the scope
of this book. If you have further interest, examine one or more of the references
noted.
Testing Principles.
In a classic book on software testing, Glen Myers [Mye79]
states a number of rules that can serve well as testing objectives:
• Testing is a process of executing a program with the intent of finding
an error.
• A good test case is one that has a high probability of finding an as-yet-
undiscovered error.
• A successful test is one that uncovers an as-yet-undiscovered error.
These objectives imply a dramatic change in viewpoint for some software develop-
ers. They move counter to the commonly held view that a successful test is one in
which no errors are found. Your objective is to design tests that systematically un-
cover different classes of errors and to do so with a minimum amount of time and
effort.
If testing is conducted successfully (according to the objectives stated previously),
it will uncover errors in the software. As a secondary benefit, testing demonstrates
that software functions appear to be working according to specification, and that
behavioral and performance requirements appear to have been met. In addition, the
data collected as testing is conducted provide a good indication of software reliabil-
ity and some indication of software quality as a whole. But testing cannot show the
absence of errors and defects; it can show only that software errors and defects are
present. It is important to keep this (rather gloomy) statement in mind as testing is
being conducted.
112
PART TWO
MODELING
WebRef
A wide variety of links
to coding standards can
be found at www
.literateprogramm
ing.com/fpstyle
.html.
What are the
objectives of
software testing?
?
In a broader software
design context, recall
that you begin “in the
large” by focusing on
software architecture
and end “in the small“
focusing on compo-
nents. For testing, you
simply reverse the
focus and test your
way out.

Davis [Dav95b] suggests a set of testing principles6 that have been adapted for use
in this book:
Principle 1. All tests should be traceable to customer requirements.7
The objective of software testing is to uncover errors. It follows that the most
severe defects (from the customer’s point of view) are those that cause the
program to fail to meet its requirements.
Principle 2. Tests should be planned long before testing begins.
Test
planning (Chapter 17) can begin as soon as the requirements model is com-
plete. Detailed definition of test cases can begin as soon as the design model
has been solidified. Therefore, all tests can be planned and designed before
any code has been generated.
Principle 3. The Pareto principle applies to software testing.
In this
context the Pareto principle implies that 80 percent of all errors uncovered
during testing will likely be traceable to 20 percent of all program compo-
nents. The problem, of course, is to isolate these suspect components and to
thoroughly test them.
Principle 4. Testing should begin “in the small” and progress toward
testing “in the large.”
The first tests planned and executed generally focus
on individual components. As testing progresses, focus shifts in an attempt
to find errors in integrated clusters of components and ultimately in the
entire system.
Principle 5. Exhaustive testing is not possible.
The number of path per-
mutations for even a moderately sized program is exceptionally large. For
this reason, it is impossible to execute every combination of paths during
testing. It is possible, however, to adequately cover program logic and to en-
sure that all conditions in the component-level design have been exercised.
4.3.5
Deployment Principles
As I noted earlier in Part 1 of this book, the deployment activity encompasses three
actions: delivery, support, and feedback. Because modern software process models
are evolutionary or incremental in nature, deployment happens not once, but a num-
ber of times as software moves toward completion. Each delivery cycle provides the
customer and end users with an operational software increment that provides usable
functions and features. Each support cycle provides documentation and human
assistance for all functions and features introduced during all deployment cycles to
CHAPTER 4
PRINCIPLES THAT GUIDE PRACTICE
113
6
Only a small subset of Davis’s testing principles are noted here. For more information, see
[Dav95b].
7
This principle refers to functional tests, i.e., tests that focus on requirements. Structural tests (tests
that focus on architectural or logical detail) may not address specific requirements directly.

date. Each feedback cycle provides the software team with important guidance that
results in modifications to the functions, features, and approach taken for the next
increment.
The delivery of a software increment represents an important milestone for any
software project. A number of key principles should be followed as the team pre-
pares to deliver an increment:
Principle 1. Customer expectations for the software must be managed.
Too often, the customer expects more than the team has promised to deliver,
and disappointment occurs immediately. This results in feedback that is not
productive and ruins team morale. In her book on managing expectations,
Naomi Karten [Kar94] states: “The starting point for managing expectations
is to become more conscientious about what you communicate and how.”
She suggests that a software engineer must be careful about sending the cus-
tomer conflicting messages (e.g., promising more than you can reasonably
deliver in the time frame provided or delivering more than you promise for
one software increment and then less than promised for the next).
Principle 2. A complete delivery package should be assembled and
tested.
A CD-ROM or other media (including Web-based downloads)
containing all executable software, support data files, support documents,
and other relevant information should be assembled and thoroughly 
beta-tested with actual users. All installation scripts and other operational
features should be thoroughly exercised in as many different computing
configurations (i.e., hardware, operating systems, peripheral devices, net-
working arrangements) as possible.
Principle 3. A support regime must be established before the software
is delivered.
An end user expects responsiveness and accurate information
when a question or problem arises. If support is ad hoc, or worse, nonexist-
ent, the customer will become dissatisfied immediately. Support should be
planned, support materials should be prepared, and appropriate record-
keeping mechanisms should be established so that the software team can
conduct a categorical assessment of the kinds of support requested.
Principle 4. Appropriate instructional materials must be provided to
end users.
The software team delivers more than the software itself.
Appropriate training aids (if required) should be developed; troubleshooting
guidelines should be provided, and when necessary, a “what’s different about
this software increment” description should be published.8
114
PART TWO
MODELING
Be sure that your cus-
tomer knows what to
expect before a soft-
ware increment is
delivered. Otherwise,
you can bet the cus-
tomer will expect more
than you deliver.
8
During the communication activity, the software team should determine what types of help mate-
rials users want.

Principle 5. Buggy software should be fixed first, delivered later.
Under
time pressure, some software organizations deliver low-quality increments
with a warning to the customer that bugs “will be fixed in the next release.”
This is a mistake. There’s a saying in the software business: “Customers will
forget you delivered a high-quality product a few days late, but they will
never forget the problems that a low-quality product caused them. The soft-
ware reminds them every day.”
The delivered software provides benefit for the end user, but it also provides use-
ful feedback for the software team. As the increment is put into use, end users should
be encouraged to comment on features and functions, ease of use, reliability, and
any other characteristics that are appropriate.
4.4
SUMMARY
Software engineering practice encompasses principles, concepts, methods, and
tools that software engineers apply throughout the software process. Every software
engineering project is different. Yet, a set of generic principles apply to the process
as a whole and to the practice of each framework activity regardless of the project
or the product.
A set of core principles help in the application of a meaningful software process
and the execution of effective software engineering methods. At the process level,
core principles establish a philosophical foundation that guides a software team as
it navigates through the software process. At the level of practice, core principles
establish a collection of values and rules that serve as a guide as you analyze a prob-
lem, design a solution, implement and test the solution, and ultimately deploy the
software in the user community.
Communication principles focus on the need to reduce noise and improve band-
width as the conversation between developer and customer progresses. Both parties
must collaborate for the best communication to occur.
Planning principles provide guidelines for constructing the best map for the
journey to a completed system or product. The plan may be designed solely for a
single software increment, or it may be defined for the entire project. Regardless,
it must address what will be done, who will do it, and when the work will be
completed.
Modeling encompasses both analysis and design, describing representations of
the software that progressively become more detailed. The intent of the models is to
solidify understanding of the work to be done and to provide technical guidance to
those who will implement the software. Modeling principles serve as a founda-
tion for the methods and notation that are used to create representations of the
software.
Construction incorporates a coding and testing cycle in which source code for a
component is generated and tested. Coding principles define generic actions that
CHAPTER 4
PRINCIPLES THAT GUIDE PRACTICE
115
