to build and maintain high-quality computer programs. Some of these technologies
are targeted at a specific application domain (e.g., website design and implementa-
tion); others focus on a technology domain (e.g., object-oriented systems or aspect-
oriented programming); and still others are broad-based (e.g., operating systems
such as Linux). However, we have yet to develop a software technology that does it
all, and the likelihood of one arising in the future is small. And yet, people bet their
jobs, their comforts, their safety, their entertainment, their decisions, and their very
lives on computer software. It better be right.
This book presents a framework that can be used by those who build computer
software—people who must get it right. The framework encompasses a process, a
set of methods, and an array of tools that we call software engineering.
1.1
THE NATURE OF SOFTWARE
Today, software takes on a dual role. It is a product, and at the same time, the vehi-
cle for delivering a product. As a product, it delivers the computing potential em-
bodied by computer hardware or more broadly, by a network of computers that are
accessible by local hardware. Whether it resides within a mobile phone or operates
inside a mainframe computer, software is an information transformer—producing,
managing, acquiring, modifying, displaying, or transmitting information that can be
as simple as a single bit or as complex as a multimedia presentation derived from
data acquired from dozens of independent sources. As the vehicle used to deliver the
product, software acts as the basis for the control of the computer (operating sys-
tems), the communication of information (networks), and the creation and control
of other programs (software tools and environments).
Software delivers the most important product of our time—information. It trans-
forms personal data (e.g., an individual’s financial transactions) so that the data can
be more useful in a local context; it manages business information to enhance com-
petitiveness; it provides a gateway to worldwide information networks (e.g., the
Internet), and provides the means for acquiring information in all of its forms.
The role of computer software has undergone significant change over the last
half-century. Dramatic improvements in hardware performance, profound changes
in computing architectures, vast increases in memory and storage capacity, and a
wide variety of exotic input and output options, have all precipitated more sophisti-
cated and complex computer-based systems. Sophistication and complexity can
produce dazzling results when a system succeeds, but they can also pose huge
problems for those who must build complex systems.
Today, a huge software industry has become a dominant factor in the economies
of the industrialized world. Teams of software specialists, each focusing on one part
of the technology required to deliver a complex application, have replaced the lone
programmer of an earlier era. And yet, the questions that were asked of the lone
CHAPTER 1
SOFTWARE AND SOFTWARE ENGINEERING
3
Software is both a
product and a vehicle
that delivers a product.
uote:
“Software is a
place where
dreams are planted
and nightmares
harvested, an
abstract, mystical
swamp where
terrible demons
compete with
magical panaceas,
a world of
werewolves and
silver bullets.”
Brad J. Cox
MODULE 1

programmer are the same questions that are asked when modern computer-based
systems are built:1
4
CHAPTER 1
SOFTWARE AND SOFTWARE ENGINEERING
1
In an excellent book of essays on the software business, Tom DeMarco [DeM95] argues the coun-
terpoint. He states: “Instead of asking why software costs so much, we need to begin asking ‘What
have we done to make it possible for today’s software to cost so little?’ The answer to that ques-
tion will help us continue the extraordinary level of achievement that has always distinguished the
software industry.”
• Why does it take so long to get software finished?
• Why are development costs so high?
• Why can’t we find all errors before we give the software to our customers?
• Why do we spend so much time and effort maintaining existing 
programs?
• Why do we continue to have difficulty in measuring progress as software is
being developed and maintained?
These, and many other questions, are a manifestation of the concern about
software and the manner in which it is developed—a concern that has lead to the
adoption of software engineering practice.
1.1.1
Defining Software
Today, most professionals and many members of the public at large feel that they
understand software. But do they?
A textbook description of software might take the following form: 
Software is: (1) instructions (computer programs) that when executed provide desired
features, function, and performance; (2) data structures that enable the programs to ad-
equately manipulate information, and (3) descriptive information in both hard copy and
virtual forms that describes the operation and use of the programs.
There is no question that other more complete definitions could be offered.
But a more formal definition probably won’t measurably improve your under-
standing. To accomplish that, it’s important to examine the characteristics of soft-
ware that make it different from other things that human beings build. Software is a
logical rather than a physical system element. Therefore, software has characteris-
tics that are considerably different than those of hardware:
1.
Software is developed or engineered; it is not manufactured in the classical sense.
Although some similarities exist between software development and hard-
ware manufacturing, the two activities are fundamentally different. In both
activities, high quality is achieved through good design, but the manufactur-
ing phase for hardware can introduce quality problems that are nonexistent
How should
we define
software?
?
Software is
engineered, not
manufactured.

(or easily corrected) for software. Both activities are dependent on people,
but the relationship between people applied and work accomplished is
entirely different (see Chapter 24). Both activities require the construction of
a “product,” but the approaches are different. Software costs are concen-
trated in engineering. This means that software projects cannot be managed
as if they were manufacturing projects.
2.
Software doesn’t “wear out.”
Figure 1.1 depicts failure rate as a function of time for hardware. The rela-
tionship, often called the “bathtub curve,” indicates that hardware exhibits
relatively high failure rates early in its life (these failures are often attributa-
ble to design or manufacturing defects); defects are corrected and the failure
rate drops to a steady-state level (hopefully, quite low) for some period of
time. As time passes, however, the failure rate rises again as hardware com-
ponents suffer from the cumulative effects of dust, vibration, abuse, tempera-
ture extremes, and many other environmental maladies. Stated simply, the
hardware begins to wear out.
Software is not susceptible to the environmental maladies that cause
hardware to wear out. In theory, therefore, the failure rate curve for software
should take the form of the “idealized curve” shown in Figure 1.2. Undiscov-
ered defects will cause high failure rates early in the life of a program.
However, these are corrected and the curve flattens as shown. The idealized
curve is a gross oversimplification of actual failure models for software.
However, the implication is clear—software doesn’t wear out. But it does
deteriorate!
CHAPTER 1
SOFTWARE AND SOFTWARE ENGINEERING
5
“Wear out”
“Infant
mortality”
Time
Failure rate
FIGURE 1.1
Failure curve
for hardware
Software doesn’t wear
out, but it does
deteriorate.
If you want to reduce
software deterioration,
you’ll have to do
better software design
(Chapters 8 to 13).

This seeming contradiction can best be explained by considering the
actual curve in Figure 1.2. During its life,2 software will undergo change. As
changes are made, it is likely that errors will be introduced, causing the
failure rate curve to spike as shown in the “actual curve” (Figure 1.2). Before
the curve can return to the original steady-state failure rate, another change
is requested, causing the curve to spike again. Slowly, the minimum failure
rate level begins to rise—the software is deteriorating due to change.
Another aspect of wear illustrates the difference between hardware and
software. When a hardware component wears out, it is replaced by a spare
part. There are no software spare parts. Every software failure indicates an
error in design or in the process through which design was translated into
machine executable code. Therefore, the software maintenance tasks that
accommodate requests for change involve considerably more complexity
than hardware maintenance.
3.
Although the industry is moving toward component-based construction, most
software continues to be custom built.
As an engineering discipline evolves, a collection of standard design compo-
nents is created. Standard screws and off-the-shelf integrated circuits are
only two of thousands of standard components that are used by mechanical
and electrical engineers as they design new systems. The reusable compo-
nents have been created so that the engineer can concentrate on the truly
innovative elements of a design, that is, the parts of the design that represent
6
CHAPTER 1
SOFTWARE AND SOFTWARE ENGINEERING
Increased failure
rate due to side
effects
Time
Failure rate
Change
Actual curve
Idealized curve
FIGURE 1.2
Failure curves
for software
2
In fact, from the moment that development begins and long before the first version is delivered,
changes may be requested by a variety of different stakeholders.
Software engineering
methods strive to
reduce the magnitude
of the spikes and the
slope of the actual
curve in Figure 1.2.
uote:
“Ideas are the
building blocks of
ideas.”
Jason Zebehazy

something new. In the hardware world, component reuse is a natural part of
the engineering process. In the software world, it is something that has only
begun to be achieved on a broad scale.
A software component should be designed and implemented so that it can
be reused in many different programs. Modern reusable components encap-
sulate both data and the processing that is applied to the data, enabling the
software engineer to create new applications from reusable parts.3 For exam-
ple, today’s interactive user interfaces are built with reusable components
that enable the creation of graphics windows, pull-down menus, and a wide
variety of interaction mechanisms. The data structures and processing detail
required to build the interface are contained within a library of reusable
components for interface construction.
1.1.2
Software Application Domains
Today, seven broad categories of computer software present continuing challenges
for software engineers:
System software—a collection of programs written to service other pro-
grams. Some system software (e.g., compilers, editors, and file management
utilities) processes complex, but determinate,4 information structures. Other
systems applications (e.g., operating system components, drivers, networking
software, telecommunications processors) process largely indeterminate data.
In either case, the systems software area is characterized by heavy interaction
with computer hardware; heavy usage by multiple users; concurrent opera-
tion that requires scheduling, resource sharing, and sophisticated process
management; complex data structures; and multiple external interfaces.
Application software—stand-alone programs that solve a specific business
need. Applications in this area process business or technical data in a way
that facilitates business operations or management/technical decision mak-
ing. In addition to conventional data processing applications, application
software is used to control business functions in real time (e.g., point-of-sale
transaction processing, real-time manufacturing process control).
Engineering/scientific software—has been characterized by “number
crunching” algorithms. Applications range from astronomy to volcanology,
from automotive stress analysis to space shuttle orbital dynamics, and
from molecular biology to automated manufacturing. However, modern
applications within the engineering/scientific area are moving away from
CHAPTER 1
SOFTWARE AND SOFTWARE ENGINEERING
7
3
Component-based development is discussed in Chapter 10.
4
Software is determinate if the order and timing of inputs, processing, and outputs is predictable.
Software is indeterminate if the order and timing of inputs, processing, and outputs cannot be
predicted in advance.
WebRef
One of the most
comprehensive libraries
of shareware/ freeware
can be found at
shareware.cnet
.com

conventional numerical algorithms. Computer-aided design, system simula-
tion, and other interactive applications have begun to take on real-time and
even system software characteristics.
Embedded software—resides within a product or system and is used to
implement and control features and functions for the end user and for the
system itself. Embedded software can perform limited and esoteric functions
(e.g., key pad control for a microwave oven) or provide significant function
and control capability (e.g., digital functions in an automobile such as fuel
control, dashboard displays, and braking systems).
Product-line software—designed to provide a specific capability for use by
many different customers. Product-line software can focus on a limited and
esoteric marketplace (e.g., inventory control products) or address mass
consumer markets (e.g., word processing, spreadsheets, computer graphics,
multimedia, entertainment, database management, and personal and
business financial applications).
Web applications—called “WebApps,” this network-centric software cate-
gory spans a wide array of applications. In their simplest form, WebApps can
be little more than a set of linked hypertext files that present information
using text and limited graphics. However, as Web 2.0 emerges, WebApps are
evolving into sophisticated computing environments that not only provide
stand-alone features, computing functions, and content to the end user, but
also are integrated with corporate databases and business applications.
Artificial intelligence software—makes use of nonnumerical algorithms to
solve complex problems that are not amenable to computation or straightfor-
ward analysis. Applications within this area include robotics, expert systems,
pattern recognition (image and voice), artificial neural networks, theorem
proving, and game playing.
Millions of software engineers worldwide are hard at work on software projects in
one or more of these categories. In some cases, new systems are being built, but in
many others, existing applications are being corrected, adapted, and enhanced. It is
not uncommon for a young software engineer to work a program that is older than
she is! Past generations of software people have left a legacy in each of the cate-
gories I have discussed. Hopefully, the legacy to be left behind by this generation will
ease the burden of future software engineers. And yet, new challenges (Chapter 31)
have appeared on the horizon:
Open-world computing—the rapid growth of wireless networking may
soon lead to true pervasive, distributed computing. The challenge for soft-
ware engineers will be to develop systems and application software that will
allow mobile devices, personal computers, and enterprise systems to com-
municate across vast networks.
8
CHAPTER 1
SOFTWARE AND SOFTWARE ENGINEERING
uote:
“There is no
computer that has
common sense.”
Marvin Minsky

Netsourcing—the World Wide Web is rapidly becoming a computing engine
as well as a content provider. The challenge for software engineers is to
architect simple (e.g., personal financial planning) and sophisticated applica-
tions that provide a benefit to targeted end-user markets worldwide.
Open source—a growing trend that results in distribution of source code for
systems applications (e.g., operating systems, database, and development en-
vironments) so that many people can contribute to its development. The chal-
lenge for software engineers is to build source code that is self-descriptive,
but more importantly, to develop techniques that will enable both customers
and developers to know what changes have been made and how those
changes manifest themselves within the software.
Each of these new challenges will undoubtedly obey the law of unintended conse-
quences and have effects (for businesspeople, software engineers, and end users) that
cannot be predicted today. However, software engineers can prepare by instantiating
a process that is agile and adaptable enough to accommodate dramatic changes in
technology and to business rules that are sure to come over the next decade.
1.1.3
Legacy Software
Hundreds of thousands of computer programs fall into one of the seven broad
application domains discussed in the preceding subsection. Some of these are state-
of-the-art software—just released to individuals, industry, and government. But
other programs are older, in some cases much older.
These older programs—often referred to as legacy software—have been the focus
of continuous attention and concern since the 1960s. Dayani-Fard and his
colleagues [Day99] describe legacy software in the following way:
Legacy software systems . . . were developed decades ago and have been continually
modified to meet changes in business requirements and computing platforms. The pro-
liferation of such systems is causing headaches for large organizations who find them
costly to maintain and risky to evolve.
Liu and his colleagues [Liu98] extend this description by noting that “many legacy
systems remain supportive to core business functions and are ‘indispensable’ to
the business.” Hence, legacy software is characterized by longevity and business
criticality.
Unfortunately, there is sometimes one additional characteristic that is present
in legacy software—poor quality.5 Legacy systems sometimes have inextensible
designs, convoluted code, poor or nonexistent documentation, test cases and results
CHAPTER 1
SOFTWARE AND SOFTWARE ENGINEERING
9
uote:
“You can’t always
predict, but you
can always
prepare.”
Anonymous
5
In this case, quality is judged based on modern software engineering thinking—a somewhat unfair
criterion since some modern software engineering concepts and principles may not have been well
understood at the time that the legacy software was developed.
What do I do
if I encounter
a legacy system
that exhibits poor
quality?
?

that were never archived, a poorly managed change history—the list can be quite
long. And yet, these systems support “core business functions and are indispensable
to the business.” What to do?
The only reasonable answer may be: Do nothing, at least until the legacy system
must undergo some significant change. If the legacy software meets the needs of its
users and runs reliably, it isn’t broken and does not need to be fixed. However, as
time passes, legacy systems often evolve for one or more of the following reasons:
• The software must be adapted to meet the needs of new computing environ-
ments or technology.
• The software must be enhanced to implement new business requirements.
• The software must be extended to make it interoperable with other more
modern systems or databases.
• The software must be re-architected to make it viable within a network
environment.
When these modes of evolution occur, a legacy system must be reengineered (Chap-
ter 29) so that it remains viable into the future. The goal of modern software engi-
neering is to “devise methodologies that are founded on the notion of evolution”;
that is, the notion that software systems continually change, new software systems
are built from the old ones, and . . . all must interoperate and cooperate with each
other” [Day99].
1.2
THE UNIQUE NATURE OF WEBAPPS
In the early days of the World Wide Web (circa 1990 to 1995), websites consisted of
little more than a set of linked hypertext files that presented information using text
and limited graphics. As time passed, the augmentation of HTML by development
tools (e.g., XML, Java) enabled Web engineers to provide computing capability along
with informational content. Web-based systems and applications6 (I refer to these col-
lectively as WebApps) were born. Today, WebApps have evolved into sophisticated
computing tools that not only provide stand-alone function to the end user, but also
have been integrated with corporate databases and business applications.
As noted in Section 1.1.2, WebApps are one of a number of distinct software cat-
egories. And yet, it can be argued that WebApps are different. Powell [Pow98] sug-
gests that Web-based systems and applications “involve a mixture between print
publishing and software development, between marketing and computing, between
10
CHAPTER 1
SOFTWARE AND SOFTWARE ENGINEERING
What types
of changes
are made to
legacy systems?
?
Every software
engineer must
recognize that change
is natural. Don’t try to
fight it.
uote:
“By the time we
see any sort of
stabilization, the
Web will have
turned into
something
completely
different.”
Louis Monier
6
In the context of this book, the term Web application (WebApp) encompasses everything from a sim-
ple Web page that might help a consumer compute an automobile lease payment to a comprehen-
sive website that provides complete travel services for businesspeople and vacationers. Included
within this category are complete websites, specialized functionality within websites, and infor-
mation processing applications that reside on the Internet or on an Intranet or Extranet.

internal communications and external relations, and between art and technology.”
The following attributes are encountered in the vast majority of WebApps.
Network intensiveness.
A WebApp resides on a network and must serve
the needs of a diverse community of clients. The network may enable world-
wide access and communication (i.e., the Internet) or more limited access
and communication (e.g., a corporate Intranet).
Concurrency.
A large number of users may access the WebApp at one
time. In many cases, the patterns of usage among end users will vary greatly.
Unpredictable load.
The number of users of the WebApp may vary by
orders of magnitude from day to day. One hundred users may show up on
Monday; 10,000 may use the system on Thursday.
Performance.
If a WebApp user must wait too long (for access, for server-
side processing, for client-side formatting and display), he or she may decide
to go elsewhere.
Availability.
Although expectation of 100 percent availability is unreason-
able, users of popular WebApps often demand access on a 24/7/365 basis.
Users in Australia or Asia might demand access during times when tradi-
tional domestic software applications in North America might be taken 
off-line for maintenance.
Data driven.
The primary function of many WebApps is to use hypermedia
to present text, graphics, audio, and video content to the end user. In addi-
tion, WebApps are commonly used to access information that exists on data-
bases that are not an integral part of the Web-based environment (e.g.,
e-commerce or financial applications).
Content sensitive.
The quality and aesthetic nature of content remains an
important determinant of the quality of a WebApp.
Continuous evolution.
Unlike conventional application software that
evolves over a series of planned, chronologically spaced releases, Web appli-
cations evolve continuously. It is not unusual for some WebApps (specifically,
their content) to be updated on a minute-by-minute schedule or for content
to be independently computed for each request.
Immediacy.
Although immediacy—the compelling need to get software to
market quickly—is a characteristic of many application domains, WebApps
often exhibit a time-to-market that can be a matter of a few days or weeks.7
Security.
Because WebApps are available via network access, it is difficult,
if not impossible, to limit the population of end users who may access the
application. In order to protect sensitive content and provide secure modes
CHAPTER 1
SOFTWARE AND SOFTWARE ENGINEERING
11
7
With modern tools, sophisticated Web pages can be produced in only a few hours.
What
characteristic
differentiates
WebApps from
other software?
?

of data transmission, strong security measures must be implemented
throughout the infrastructure that supports a WebApp and within the appli-
cation itself.
Aesthetics.
An undeniable part of the appeal of a WebApp is its look and
feel. When an application has been designed to market or sell products or
ideas, aesthetics may have as much to do with success as technical design.
It can be argued that other application categories discussed in Section 1.1.2 can
exhibit some of the attributes noted. However, WebApps almost always exhibit all of
them.
1.3
SOFTWARE ENGINEERING
In order to build software that is ready to meet the challenges of the twenty-first
century, you must recognize a few simple realities:
• Software has become deeply embedded in virtually every aspect of our lives,
and as a consequence, the number of people who have an interest in the
features and functions provided by a specific application8 has grown dramati-
cally. When a new application or embedded system is to be built, many
voices must be heard. And it sometimes seems that each of them has a
slightly different idea of what software features and functions should be
delivered. It follows that a concerted effort should be made to understand the
problem before a software solution is developed.
• The information technology requirements demanded by individuals, busi-
nesses, and governments grow increasing complex with each passing year.
Large teams of people now create computer programs that were once built
by a single individual. Sophisticated software that was once implemented in
a predictable, self-contained, computing environment is now embedded
inside everything from consumer electronics to medical devices to weapons
systems. The complexity of these new computer-based systems and products
demands careful attention to the interactions of all system elements. It
follows that design becomes a pivotal activity.
• Individuals, businesses, and governments increasingly rely on software for
strategic and tactical decision making as well as day-to-day operations and
control. If the software fails, people and major enterprises can experience
anything from minor inconvenience to catastrophic failures. It follows that
software should exhibit high quality.
• As the perceived value of a specific application grows, the likelihood is that
its user base and longevity will also grow. As its user base and time-in-use
12
CHAPTER 1
SOFTWARE AND SOFTWARE ENGINEERING
8
I will call these people “stakeholders” later in this book.
Understand the
problem before you
build a solution.
Design is a pivotal
software engineering
activity.
Both quality and
maintainability are an
outgrowth of good
design.

increase, demands for adaptation and enhancement will also grow. It follows
that software should be maintainable.
These simple realities lead to one conclusion: software in all of its forms and across all
of its application domains should be engineered. And that leads us to the topic of this
book—software engineering.
Although hundreds of authors have developed personal definitions of software
engineering, a definition proposed by Fritz Bauer [Nau69] at the seminal conference
on the subject still serves as a basis for discussion:
[Software engineering is] the establishment and use of sound engineering principles in or-
der to obtain economically software that is reliable and works efficiently on real machines.
You will be tempted to add to this definition.9 It says little about the technical as-
pects of software quality; it does not directly address the need for customer satisfac-
tion or timely product delivery; it omits mention of the importance of measurement
and metrics; it does not state the importance of an effective process. And yet, Bauer’s
definition provides us with a baseline. What are the “sound engineering principles”
that can be applied to computer software development? How do we “economically”
build software so that it is “reliable”? What is required to create computer programs
that work “efficiently” on not one but many different “real machines”? These are the
questions that continue to challenge software engineers.
The IEEE [IEE93a] has developed a more comprehensive definition when it states:
Software Engineering: (1) The application of a systematic, disciplined, quantifiable approach
to the development, operation, and maintenance of software; that is, the application of
engineering to software. (2) The study of approaches as in (1).
And yet, a “systematic, disciplined, and quantifiable” approach applied by one
software team may be burdensome to another. We need discipline, but we also need
adaptability and agility.
Software engineering is a layered technology. Referring to Figure 1.3, any engineer-
ing approach (including software engineering) must rest on an organizational com-
mitment to quality. Total quality management, Six Sigma, and similar philosophies10
foster a continuous process improvement culture, and it is this culture that ultimately
leads to the development of increasingly more effective approaches to software engi-
neering. The bedrock that supports software engineering is a quality focus.
The foundation for software engineering is the process layer. The software engi-
neering process is the glue that holds the technology layers together and enables
rational and timely development of computer software. Process defines a framework
CHAPTER 1
SOFTWARE AND SOFTWARE ENGINEERING
13
uote:
“More than a
discipline or a body
of knowledge,
engineering is a
verb, an action
word, a way of
approaching a
problem.”
Scott Whitmir
How do we
define
software
engineering?
?
9
For numerous additional definitions of software engineering, see www.answers.com/topic/
software-engineering#wp-_note-13.
10 Quality management and related approaches are discussed in Chapter 14 and throughout Part 3 of
this book.
Software engineering
encompasses a
process, methods for
managing and
engineering software,
and tools.

that must be established for effective delivery of software engineering technology.
The software process forms the basis for management control of software projects
and establishes the context in which technical methods are applied, work products
(models, documents, data, reports, forms, etc.) are produced, milestones are estab-
lished, quality is ensured, and change is properly managed.
Software engineering methods provide the technical how-to’s for building soft-
ware. Methods encompass a broad array of tasks that include communication,
requirements analysis, design modeling, program construction, testing, and sup-
port. Software engineering methods rely on a set of basic principles that govern
each area of the technology and include modeling activities and other descriptive
techniques.
Software engineering tools provide automated or semiautomated support for the
process and the methods. When tools are integrated so that information created by
one tool can be used by another, a system for the support of software development,
called computer-aided software engineering, is established.
1.4
THE SOFTWARE PROCESS
A process is a collection of activities, actions, and tasks that are performed when
some work product is to be created. An activity strives to achieve a broad objective
(e.g., communication with stakeholders) and is applied regardless of the application
domain, size of the project, complexity of the effort, or degree of rigor with which
software engineering is to be applied. An action (e.g., architectural design) encom-
passes a set of tasks that produce a major work product (e.g., an architectural design
model). A task focuses on a small, but well-defined objective (e.g., conducting a unit
test) that produces a tangible outcome.
In the context of software engineering, a process is not a rigid prescription for how
to build computer software. Rather, it is an adaptable approach that enables the peo-
ple doing the work (the software team) to pick and choose the appropriate set of
work actions and tasks. The intent is always to deliver software in a timely manner
and with sufficient quality to satisfy those who have sponsored its creation and those
who will use it.
14
CHAPTER 1
SOFTWARE AND SOFTWARE ENGINEERING
Tools
A quality focus
Methods
Process
FIGURE 1.3
Software
engineering
layers
WebRef
CrossTalk is a journal
that provides
pragmatic
information on
process, methods,
and tools. It can be
found at:
www.stsc
.hill.af.mil.
What are the
elements of
a software
process?
?
uote:
“A process defines
who is doing what
when and how to
reach a certain
goal.”
Ivar Jacobson,
Grady Booch,
and James
Rumbaugh

A process framework establishes the foundation for a complete software engi-
neering process by identifying a small number of framework activities that are appli-
cable to all software projects, regardless of their size or complexity. In addition, the
process framework encompasses a set of umbrella activities that are applicable
across the entire software process. A generic process framework for software engi-
neering encompasses five activities:
Communication.
Before any technical work can commence, it is critically
important to communicate and collaborate with the customer (and other
stakeholders11 The intent is to understand stakeholders’ objectives for the
project and to gather requirements that help define software features and
functions.
Planning.
Any complicated journey can be simplified if a map exists. A
software project is a complicated journey, and the planning activity creates a
“map” that helps guide the team as it makes the journey. The map—called a
software project plan—defines the software engineering work by describing
the technical tasks to be conducted, the risks that are likely, the resources
that will be required, the work products to be produced, and a work
schedule.
Modeling.
Whether you’re a landscaper, a bridge builder, an aeronautical
engineer, a carpenter, or an architect, you work with models every day. You
create a “sketch” of the thing so that you’ll understand the big picture—what
it will look like architecturally, how the constituent parts fit together, and
many other characteristics. If required, you refine the sketch into greater and
greater detail in an effort to better understand the problem and how you’re
going to solve it. A software engineer does the same thing by creating mod-
els to better understand software requirements and the design that will
achieve those requirements.
Construction.
This activity combines code generation (either manual or
automated) and the testing that is required to uncover errors in the code.
Deployment.
The software (as a complete entity or as a partially com-
pleted increment) is delivered to the customer who evaluates the delivered
product and provides feedback based on the evaluation.
These five generic framework activities can be used during the development of small,
simple programs, the creation of large Web applications, and for the engineering of
large, complex computer-based systems. The details of the software process will be
quite different in each case, but the framework activities remain the same.
CHAPTER 1
SOFTWARE AND SOFTWARE ENGINEERING
15
11 A stakeholder is anyone who has a stake in the successful outcome of the project—business man-
agers, end users, software engineers, support people, etc. Rob Thomsett jokes that, “a stakeholder
is a person holding a large and sharp stake. . . . If you don’t look after your stakeholders, you know
where the stake will end up.”). 
What are the
five generic
process
framework
activities?
?
uote:
“Einstein argued
that there must be
a simplified
explanation of
nature, because
God is not
capricious or
arbitrary. No such
faith comforts the
software engineer.
Much of the
complexity that he
must master is
arbitrary
complexity.”
Fred Brooks

For many software projects, framework activities are applied iteratively as a
project progresses. That is, communication, planning, modeling, construction,
and deployment are applied repeatedly through a number of project iterations.
Each project iteration produces a software increment that provides stakeholders with
a subset of overall software features and functionality. As each increment is pro-
duced, the software becomes more and more complete.
Software engineering process framework activities are complemented by a num-
ber of umbrella activities. In general, umbrella activities are applied throughout a soft-
ware project and help a software team manage and control progress, quality,
change, and risk. Typical umbrella activities include:
Software project tracking and control—allows the software team to
assess progress against the project plan and take any necessary action to
maintain the schedule.
Risk management—assesses risks that may affect the outcome of the
project or the quality of the product.
Software quality assurance—defines and conducts the activities required
to ensure software quality.
Technical reviews—assesses software engineering work products in an effort
to uncover and remove errors before they are propagated to the next activity.
Measurement—defines and collects process, project, and product measures
that assist the team in delivering software that meets stakeholders’ needs;
can be used in conjunction with all other framework and umbrella activities.
Software configuration management—manages the effects of change
throughout the software process.
Reusability management—defines criteria for work product reuse
(including software components) and establishes mechanisms to achieve
reusable components.
Work product preparation and production—encompasses the activities
required to create work products such as models, documents, logs, forms,
and lists.
Each of these umbrella activities is discussed in detail later in this book.
Earlier in this section, I noted that the software engineering process is not a rigid
prescription that must be followed dogmatically by a software team. Rather, it should
be agile and adaptable (to the problem, to the project, to the team, and to the organi-
zational culture). Therefore, a process adopted for one project might be significantly
different than a process adopted for another project. Among the differences are
• Overall flow of activities, actions, and tasks and the interdependencies
among them
• Degree to which actions and tasks are defined within each framework activity
• Degree to which work products are identified and required
16
CHAPTER 1
SOFTWARE AND SOFTWARE ENGINEERING
Umbrella activities
occur throughout the
software process and
focus primarily on
project management,
tracking, and control.
Software process
adaptation is essential
for project success.
How do
process
models differ from
one another?
?

• Manner in which quality assurance activities are applied
• Manner in which project tracking and control activities are applied
• Overall degree of detail and rigor with which the process is described
• Degree to which the customer and other stakeholders are involved with the
project
• Level of autonomy given to the software team
• Degree to which team organization and roles are prescribed
In Part 1 of this book, I’ll examine software process in considerable detail. Prescriptive
process models (Chapter 2) stress detailed definition, identification, and application
of process activities and tasks. Their intent is to improve system quality, make proj-
ects more manageable, make delivery dates and costs more predictable, and guide
teams of software engineers as they perform the work required to build a system.
Unfortunately, there have been times when these objectives were not achieved. If
prescriptive models are applied dogmatically and without adaptation, they can in-
crease the level of bureaucracy associated with building computer-based systems
and inadvertently create difficulty for all stakeholders.
Agile process models (Chapter 3) emphasize project “agility” and follow a set of prin-
ciples that lead to a more informal (but, proponents argue, no less effective) approach
to software process. These process models are generally characterized as “agile” be-
cause they emphasize maneuverability and adaptability. They are appropriate for many
types of projects and are particularly useful when Web applications are engineered.
1.5
SOFTWARE ENGINEERING PRACTICE
In Section 1.4, I introduced a generic software process model composed of a set of
activities that establish a framework for software engineering practice. Generic
framework activities—communication, planning, modeling, construction, and
deployment—and umbrella activities establish a skeleton architecture for software
engineering work. But how does the practice of software engineering fit in? In the
sections that follow, you’ll gain a basic understanding of the generic concepts and
principles that apply to framework activities.12
1.5.1
The Essence of Practice
In a classic book, How to Solve It, written before modern computers existed, George
Polya [Pol45] outlined the essence of problem solving, and consequently, the essence
of software engineering practice:
1.
Understand the problem (communication and analysis).
2.
Plan a solution (modeling and software design).
CHAPTER 1
SOFTWARE AND SOFTWARE ENGINEERING
17
What
characterizes
an “agile”
process?
?
uote:
“I feel a recipe is
only a theme which
an intelligent cook
can play each time
with a variation.”
Madame Benoit
WebRef
A variety of thought-
provoking quotes on
the practice of software
engineering can be
found at www
.literateprogramming
.com
You might argue that
Polya’s approach is
simply common sense.
True. But it’s amazing
how often common
sense is uncommon in
the software world.
12 You should revisit relevant sections within this chapter as specific software engineering methods
and umbrella activities are discussed later in this book.

3.
Carry out the plan (code generation).
4.
Examine the result for accuracy (testing and quality assurance).
In the context of software engineering, these commonsense steps lead to a series of
essential questions [adapted from Pol45]:
Understand the problem.
It’s sometimes difficult to admit, but most of us suffer
from hubris when we’re presented with a problem. We listen for a few seconds and
then think, Oh yeah, I understand, let’s get on with solving this thing. Unfortunately,
understanding isn’t always that easy. It’s worth spending a little time answering a
few simple questions:
• Who has a stake in the solution to the problem? That is, who are the stake-
holders?
• What are the unknowns? What data, functions, and features are required to
properly solve the problem?
• Can the problem be compartmentalized? Is it possible to represent smaller
problems that may be easier to understand?
• Can the problem be represented graphically? Can an analysis model be created?
Plan the solution.
Now you understand the problem (or so you think) and you
can’t wait to begin coding. Before you do, slow down just a bit and do a little
design:
• Have you seen similar problems before? Are there patterns that are recogniz-
able in a potential solution? Is there existing software that implements the
data, functions, and features that are required?
• Has a similar problem been solved? If so, are elements of the solution
reusable?
• Can subproblems be defined? If so, are solutions readily apparent for the
subproblems?
• Can you represent a solution in a manner that leads to effective implementation?
Can a design model be created?
Carry out the plan.
The design you’ve created serves as a road map for the
system you want to build. There may be unexpected detours, and it’s possible that
you’ll discover an even better route as you go, but the “plan” will allow you to
proceed without getting lost.
• Does the solution conform to the plan? Is source code traceable to the design
model?
• Is each component part of the solution provably correct? Have the design and
code been reviewed, or better, have correctness proofs been applied to the
algorithm?
18
CHAPTER 1
SOFTWARE AND SOFTWARE ENGINEERING
uote:
“There is a grain of
discovery in the
solution of any
problem.”
George Polya

Examine the result.
You can’t be sure that your solution is perfect, but you can be
sure that you’ve designed a sufficient number of tests to uncover as many errors as
possible.
• Is it possible to test each component part of the solution? Has a reasonable
testing strategy been implemented?
• Does the solution produce results that conform to the data, functions, and
features that are required? Has the software been validated against all
stakeholder requirements?
It shouldn’t surprise you that much of this approach is common sense. In fact, it’s
reasonable to state that a commonsense approach to software engineering will
never lead you astray.
1.5.2
General Principles
The dictionary defines the word principle as “an important underlying law or as-
sumption required in a system of thought.” Throughout this book I’ll discuss princi-
ples at many different levels of abstraction. Some focus on software engineering as a
whole, others consider a specific generic framework activity (e.g., communication),
and still others focus on software engineering actions (e.g., architectural design) or
technical tasks (e.g., write a usage scenario). Regardless of their level of focus, prin-
ciples help you establish a mind-set for solid software engineering practice. They are
important for that reason.
David Hooker [Hoo96] has proposed seven principles that focus on software
engineering practice as a whole. They are reproduced in the following
paragraphs:13
The First Principle: The Reason It All Exists
A software system exists for one reason: to provide value to its users. All
decisions should be made with this in mind. Before specifying a system require-
ment, before noting a piece of system functionality, before determining the hard-
ware platforms or development processes, ask yourself questions such as: “Does
this add real value to the system?” If the answer is “no,” don’t do it. All other
principles support this one.
The Second Principle: KISS (Keep It Simple, Stupid!)
Software design is not a haphazard process. There are many factors to consider
in any design effort. All design should be as simple as possible, but no simpler. This
facilitates having a more easily understood and easily maintained system. This is
CHAPTER 1
SOFTWARE AND SOFTWARE ENGINEERING
19
13 Reproduced with permission of the author [Hoo96]. Hooker defines patterns for these principles at
http://c2.com/cgi/wiki?SevenPrinciplesOfSoftwareDevelopment.
Before beginning a
software project, be
sure the software has
a business purpose and
that users perceive
value in it.

not to say that features, even internal features, should be discarded in the name of
simplicity. Indeed, the more elegant designs are usually the more simple ones. Sim-
ple also does not mean “quick and dirty.” In fact, it often takes a lot of thought and
work over multiple iterations to simplify. The payoff is software that is more main-
tainable and less error-prone.
The Third Principle: Maintain the Vision
A clear vision is essential to the success of a software project. Without one, a
project almost unfailingly ends up being “of two [or more] minds” about itself.
Without conceptual integrity, a system threatens to become a patchwork of in-
compatible designs, held together by the wrong kind of screws. . . . Compromis-
ing the architectural vision of a software system weakens and will eventually
break even the well-designed systems. Having an empowered architect who can
hold the vision and enforce compliance helps ensure a very successful software
project.
The Fourth Principle: What You Produce, Others Will Consume
Seldom is an industrial-strength software system constructed and used in a
vacuum. In some way or other, someone else will use, maintain, document, or
otherwise depend on being able to understand your system. So, always specify,
design, and implement knowing someone else will have to understand what you are
doing. The audience for any product of software development is potentially large.
Specify with an eye to the users. Design, keeping the implementers in mind. Code
with concern for those that must maintain and extend the system. Someone may
have to debug the code you write, and that makes them a user of your code.
Making their job easier adds value to the system.
The Fifth Principle: Be Open to the Future
A system with a long lifetime has more value. In today’s computing environ-
ments, where specifications change on a moment’s notice and hardware platforms
are obsolete just a few months old, software lifetimes are typically measured in
months instead of years. However, true “industrial-strength” software systems
must endure far longer. To do this successfully, these systems must be ready to
adapt to these and other changes. Systems that do this successfully are those that
have been designed this way from the start. Never design yourself into a corner.
Always ask “what if,” and prepare for all possible answers by creating systems that
solve the general problem, not just the specific one.14 This could very possibly lead
to the reuse of an entire system.
20
CHAPTER 1
SOFTWARE AND SOFTWARE ENGINEERING
If software has value,
it will change over its
useful life. For that
reason, software must
be built to be
maintainable.
14 This advice can be dangerous if it is taken to extremes. Designing for the “general problem” some-
times requires performance compromises and can make specific solutions inefficient.
uote:
“There is a certain
majesty in
simplicity which is
far above all the
quaintness of wit.”
Alexander Pope
(1688–1744)

The Sixth Principle: Plan Ahead for Reuse
Reuse saves time and effort.15Achieving a high level of reuse is arguably the
hardest goal to accomplish in developing a software system. The reuse of code and
designs has been proclaimed as a major benefit of using object-oriented technolo-
gies. However, the return on this investment is not automatic. To leverage the
reuse possibilities that object-oriented [or conventional] programming provides
requires forethought and planning. There are many techniques to realize reuse
at every level of the system development process. . . . Planning ahead for reuse
reduces the cost and increases the value of both the reusable components and the
systems into which they are incorporated.
The Seventh principle: Think!
This last principle is probably the most overlooked. Placing clear, complete
thought before action almost always produces better results. When you think about
something, you are more likely to do it right. You also gain knowledge about how
to do it right again. If you do think about something and still do it wrong, it be-
comes a valuable experience. A side effect of thinking is learning to recognize
when you don’t know something, at which point you can research the answer.
When clear thought has gone into a system, value comes out. Applying the first six
principles requires intense thought, for which the potential rewards are enormous.
If every software engineer and every software team simply followed Hooker’s seven
principles, many of the difficulties we experience in building complex computer-
based systems would be eliminated.
1.6
SOFTWARE MYTHS
Software myths—erroneous beliefs about software and the process that is used to
build it—can be traced to the earliest days of computing. Myths have a number of
attributes that make them insidious. For instance, they appear to be reasonable
statements of fact (sometimes containing elements of truth), they have an intuitive
feel, and they are often promulgated by experienced practitioners who “know the
score.”
Today, most knowledgeable software engineering professionals recognize myths
for what they are—misleading attitudes that have caused serious problems for
managers and practitioners alike. However, old attitudes and habits are difficult to
modify, and remnants of software myths remain.
CHAPTER 1
SOFTWARE AND SOFTWARE ENGINEERING
21
15 Although this is true for those who reuse the software on future projects, reuse can be expensive
for those who must design and build reusable components. Studies indicate that designing and
building reusable components can cost between 25 to 200 percent more than targeted software. In
some cases, the cost differential cannot be justified.
uote:
“In the absence of
meaningful
standards, a new
industry like
software comes to
depend instead on
folklore.”
Tom DeMarco

Management myths.
Managers with software responsibility, like managers in
most disciplines, are often under pressure to maintain budgets, keep schedules from
slipping, and improve quality. Like a drowning person who grasps at a straw, a soft-
ware manager often grasps at belief in a software myth, if that belief will lessen the
pressure (even temporarily).
Myth:
We already have a book that’s full of standards and procedures for
building software. Won’t that provide my people with everything they
need to know?
Reality:
The book of standards may very well exist, but is it used? Are soft-
ware practitioners aware of its existence? Does it reflect modern
software engineering practice? Is it complete? Is it adaptable? Is it
streamlined to improve time-to-delivery while still maintaining a
focus on quality? In many cases, the answer to all of these questions
is “no.”
Myth:
If we get behind schedule, we can add more programmers and catch up
(sometimes called the “Mongolian horde” concept).
Reality:
Software development is not a mechanistic process like manufactur-
ing. In the words of Brooks [Bro95]: “adding people to a late soft-
ware project makes it later.” At first, this statement may seem
counterintuitive. However, as new people are added, people who
were working must spend time educating the newcomers, thereby
reducing the amount of time spent on productive development
effort. People can be added but only in a planned and well-
coordinated manner.
Myth:
If I decide to outsource the software project to a third party, I can just
relax and let that firm build it.
Reality:
If an organization does not understand how to manage and control
software projects internally, it will invariably struggle when it out-
sources software projects.
Customer myths.
A customer who requests computer software may be a person
at the next desk, a technical group down the hall, the marketing/sales department,
or an outside company that has requested software under contract. In many cases,
the customer believes myths about software because software managers and prac-
titioners do little to correct misinformation. Myths lead to false expectations (by the
customer) and, ultimately, dissatisfaction with the developer.
Myth:
A general statement of objectives is sufficient to begin writing
programs—we can fill in the details later.
Reality:
Although a comprehensive and stable statement of requirements is
not always possible, an ambiguous “statement of objectives” is a
recipe for disaster. Unambiguous requirements (usually derived
22
CHAPTER 1
SOFTWARE AND SOFTWARE ENGINEERING
WebRef
The Software Project
Managers Network at
www.spmn.com
can help you dispel
these and other myths.
Work very hard to
understand what you
have to do before you
start. You may not be
able to develop every
detail, but the more
you know, the less risk
you take.

iteratively) are developed only through effective and continuous
communication between customer and developer.
Myth:
Software requirements continually change, but change can be easily
accommodated because software is flexible.
Reality:
It is true that software requirements change, but the impact of
change varies with the time at which it is introduced. When require-
ments changes are requested early (before design or code has been
started), the cost impact is relatively small.16 However, as time
passes, the cost impact grows rapidly—resources have been commit-
ted, a design framework has been established, and change can
cause upheaval that requires additional resources and major design
modification.
Practitioner’s myths.
Myths that are still believed by software practitioners have
been fostered by over 50 years of programming culture. During the early days, pro-
gramming was viewed as an art form. Old ways and attitudes die hard.
Myth:
Once we write the program and get it to work, our job is done.
Reality:
Someone once said that “the sooner you begin ‘writing code,’ the
longer it’ll take you to get done.” Industry data indicate that between
60 and 80 percent of all effort expended on software will be ex-
pended after it is delivered to the customer for the first time.
Myth:
Until I get the program “running” I have no way of assessing its quality.
Reality:
One of the most effective software quality assurance mechanisms
can be applied from the inception of a project—the technical review.
Software reviews (described in Chapter 15) are a “quality filter” that
have been found to be more effective than testing for finding certain
classes of software defects.
Myth:
The only deliverable work product for a successful project is the working
program.
Reality:
A working program is only one part of a software configuration that
includes many elements. A variety of work products (e.g., models,
documents, plans) provide a foundation for successful engineering
and, more important, guidance for software support.
Myth:
Software engineering will make us create voluminous and unnecessary
documentation and will invariably slow us down.
Reality:
Software engineering is not about creating documents. It is about
creating a quality product. Better quality leads to reduced rework.
And reduced rework results in faster delivery times.
CHAPTER 1
SOFTWARE AND SOFTWARE ENGINEERING
23
Whenever you think,
we don’t have time for
software engineering,
ask yourself, “Will we
have time to do it over
again?”
16 Many software engineers have adopted an “agile” approach that accommodates change incre-
mentally, thereby controlling its impact and cost. Agile methods are discussed in Chapter 3.

Many software professionals recognize the fallacy of the myths just described.
Regrettably, habitual attitudes and methods foster poor management and technical
practices, even when reality dictates a better approach. Recognition of software
realities is the first step toward formulation of practical solutions for software
engineering.
1.7
HOW IT ALL STARTS
Every software project is precipitated by some business need—the need to correct a
defect in an existing application; the need to adapt a “legacy system” to a changing
business environment; the need to extend the functions and features of an existing
application; or the need to create a new product, service, or system.
At the beginning of a software project, the business need is often expressed
informally as part of a simple conversation. The conversation presented in the
sidebar is typical.
24
CHAPTER 1
SOFTWARE AND SOFTWARE ENGINEERING
How a Project Starts
The scene: Meeting room at CPI
Corporation, a (fictional) company that makes consumer
products for home and commercial use.
The players: Mal Golden, senior manager, product
development; Lisa Perez, marketing manager; Lee
Warren, engineering manager; Joe Camalleri, executive
VP, business development
The conversation:
Joe: Okay, Lee, what’s this I hear about your folks
developing a what? A generic universal wireless box?
Lee: It’s pretty cool . . . about the size of a small
matchbook . . . we can attach it to sensors of all kinds, a
digital camera, just about anything. Using the 802.11g
wireless protocol. It allows us to access the device’s output
without wires. We think it’ll lead to a whole new
generation of products.
Joe: You agree, Mal?
Mal: I do. In fact, with sales as flat as they’ve been this
year, we need something new. Lisa and I have been
doing a little market research, and we think we’ve got a
line of products that could be big.
Joe: How big . . . bottom line big?
Mal (avoiding a direct commitment): Tell him
about our idea, Lisa.
Lisa: It’s a whole new generation of what we call “home
management products.” We call ’em SafeHome. They use
the new wireless interface, provide homeowners or small-
business people with a system that’s controlled by their
PC—home security, home surveillance, appliance and
device control—you know, turn down the home air
conditioner while you’re driving home, that sort of thing.
Lee (jumping in): Engineering’s done a technical
feasibility study of this idea, Joe. It’s doable at low
manufacturing cost. Most hardware is off-the-shelf.
Software is an issue, but it’s nothing that we can’t do.
Joe: Interesting. Now, I asked about the bottom line.
Mal: PCs have penetrated over 70 percent of all
households in the USA. If we could price this thing right, 
it could be a killer-App. Nobody else has our wireless
box . . . it’s proprietary. We’ll have a 2-year jump on
the competition. Revenue? Maybe as much as 30 to 
40 million dollars in the second year.
Joe (smiling): Let’s take this to the next level. I’m
interested.
SAFEHOME17
17 The SafeHome project will be used throughout this book to illustrate the inner workings of a project
team as it builds a software product. The company, the project, and the people are purely fictitious,
but the situations and problems are real.

CHAPTER 2
PROCESS MODELS
31
But what exactly is a software process from a technical point of view? Within the
context of this book, I define a software process as a framework for the activities, ac-
tions, and tasks that are required to build high-quality software. Is “process” syn-
onymous with software engineering? The answer is “yes and no.” A software process
defines the approach that is taken as software is engineered. But software engi-
neering also encompasses technologies that populate the process—technical meth-
ods and automated tools.
More important, software engineering is performed by creative, knowledgeable
people who should adapt a mature software process so that it is appropriate for the
products that they build and the demands of their marketplace.
2.1
A GENERIC PROCESS MODEL
In Chapter 1, a process was defined as a collection of work activities, actions, and
tasks that are performed when some work product is to be created. Each of these
activities, actions, and tasks reside within a framework or model that defines their
relationship with the process and with one another.
The software process is represented schematically in Figure 2.1. Referring to the
figure, each framework activity is populated by a set of software engineering actions.
Each software engineering action is defined by a task set that identifies the work
tasks that are to be completed, the work products that will be produced, the quality
assurance points that will be required, and the milestones that will be used to indi-
cate progress.
As I discussed in Chapter 1, a generic process framework for software engineer-
ing defines five framework activities—communication, planning, modeling,
construction, and deployment. In addition, a set of umbrella activities—project
tracking and control, risk management, quality assurance, configuration manage-
ment, technical reviews, and others—are applied throughout the process.
You should note that one important aspect of the software process has not
yet been discussed. This aspect—called process flow—describes how the frame-
work activities and the actions and tasks that occur within each framework
activity are organized with respect to sequence and time and is illustrated in
Figure 2.2.
A linear process flow executes each of the five framework activities in sequence,
beginning with communication and culminating with deployment (Figure 2.2a). An
iterative process flow repeats one or more of the activities before proceeding to the
next (Figure 2.2b). An evolutionary process flow executes the activities in a “circular”
manner. Each circuit through the five activities leads to a more complete version
of the software (Figure 2.2c). A parallel process flow (Figure 2.2d) executes one or
more activities in parallel with other activities (e.g., modeling for one aspect of the
software might be executed in parallel with construction of another aspect of the
software).
The hierarchy of
technical work within
the software process is
activities,
encompassing actions,
populated by tasks.
uote:
“We think that
software
developers are
missing a vital
truth: most
organizations don’t
know what they
do. They think they
know, but they
don’t know.”
Tom DeMarco

2.1.1
Defining a Framework Activity
Although I have described five framework activities and provided a basic defini-
tion of each in Chapter 1, a software team would need significantly more infor-
mation before it could properly execute any one of these activities as part of the
software process. Therefore, you are faced with a key question: What actions are
appropriate for a framework activity, given the nature of the problem to be solved, the
characteristics of the people doing the work, and the stakeholders who are sponsor-
ing the project?
32
PART ONE
THE SOFTWARE PROCESS
Process framework
Umbrella activities
framework activity # 1
Task sets
work tasks
work products
quality assurance points
project milestones
software engineering action #1.1
Task sets
work tasks
work products
quality assurance points
project milestones
software engineering action #1.k
framework activity # n
Task sets
work tasks
work products
quality assurance points
project milestones
software engineering action #n.1
Task sets
work tasks
work products
quality assurance points
project milestones
software engineering action #n.m
Software process
FIGURE 2.1
A software
process
framework

CHAPTER 2
PROCESS MODELS
33
(d) Parallel process flow
(c) Evolutionary process flow
Communication
Planning
Modeling
(a) Linear process flow
Construction
Deployment
Communication
Planning
Modeling
Construction
Deployment
Construction
Deployment
Communication
Planning
Modeling
Time
(b) Iterative process flow
Planning
Modeling
Construction
Deployment
Increment
released
Communication
FIGURE 2.2
Process flow
For a small software project requested by one person (at a remote location) with
simple, straightforward requirements, the communication activity might encompass
little more than a phone call with the appropriate stakeholder. Therefore, the only
necessary action is phone conversation, and the work tasks (the task set) that this
action encompasses are:
1.
Make contact with stakeholder via telephone.
2.
Discuss requirements and take notes.
How does a
framework
activity change as
the nature of the
project changes?
?

3.
Organize notes into a brief written statement of requirements.
4.
E-mail to stakeholder for review and approval.
If the project was considerably more complex with many stakeholders, each with
a different set of (sometime conflicting) requirements, the communication activity
might have six distinct actions (described in Chapter 5): inception, elicitation, elabo-
ration, negotiation, specification, and validation. Each of these software engineering
actions would have many work tasks and a number of distinct work products.
2.1.2
Identifying a Task Set
Referring again to Figure 2.1, each software engineering action (e.g., elicitation, an
action associated with the communication activity) can be represented by a number
of different task sets—each a collection of software engineering work tasks, related
work products, quality assurance points, and project milestones. You should choose
a task set that best accommodates the needs of the project and the characteristics of
your team. This implies that a software engineering action can be adapted to the spe-
cific needs of the software project and the characteristics of the project team. 
34
PART ONE
THE SOFTWARE PROCESS
Task Set
A task set defines the actual work to be done
to accomplish the objectives of a software
engineering action. For example, elicitation (more
commonly called “requirements gathering”) is an
important software engineering action that occurs during
the communication activity. The goal of requirements
gathering is to understand what various stakeholders want
from the software that is to be built.
For a small, relatively simple project, the task set for
requirements gathering might look like this:
1.
Make a list of stakeholders for the project.
2.
Invite all stakeholders to an informal meeting.
3.
Ask each stakeholder to make a list of features and
functions required.
4.
Discuss requirements and build a final list.
5.
Prioritize requirements.
6.
Note areas of uncertainty.
For a larger, more complex software project, a
different task set would be required. It might encompass
the following work tasks:
1.
Make a list of stakeholders for the project.
2.
Interview each stakeholder separately to determine
overall wants and needs.
3.
Build a preliminary list of functions and features
based on stakeholder input.
4.
Schedule a series of facilitated application
specification meetings.
5.
Conduct meetings.
6.
Produce informal user scenarios as part of each
meeting.
7.
Refine user scenarios based on stakeholder
feedback.
8.
Build a revised list of stakeholder requirements.
9.
Use quality function deployment techniques to
prioritize requirements.
10.
Package requirements so that they can be delivered
incrementally.
11.
Note constraints and restrictions that will be placed
on the system.
12.
Discuss methods for validating the system.
Both of these task sets achieve “requirements gathering,”
but they are quite different in their depth and formality. The
software team chooses the task set that will allow it to
achieve the goal of each action and still maintain quality
and agility.
INFO
Different projects
demand different task
sets. The software
team chooses the task
set based on problem
and project
characteristics.

2.1.3
Process Patterns
Every software team encounters problems as it moves through the software process.
It would be useful if proven solutions to these problems were readily available to the
team so that the problems could be addressed and resolved quickly. A process
pattern1 describes a process-related problem that is encountered during software en-
gineering work, identifies the environment in which the problem has been encoun-
tered, and suggests one or more proven solutions to the problem. Stated in more
general terms, a process pattern provides you with a template [Amb98]—a consis-
tent method for describing problem solutions within the context of the software
process. By combining patterns, a software team can solve problems and construct
a process that best meets the needs of a project.
Patterns can be defined at any level of abstraction.2 In some cases, a pattern might
be used to describe a problem (and solution) associated with a complete process
model (e.g., prototyping). In other situations, patterns can be used to describe a prob-
lem (and solution) associated with a framework activity (e.g., planning) or an action
within a framework activity (e.g., project estimating).
Ambler [Amb98] has proposed a template for describing a process pattern:
Pattern Name.
The pattern is given a meaningful name describing it
within the context of the software process (e.g., TechnicalReviews).
Forces.
The environment in which the pattern is encountered and the
issues that make the problem visible and may affect its solution.
Type.
The pattern type is specified. Ambler [Amb98] suggests three types:
1.
Stage pattern—defines a problem associated with a framework activity for
the process. Since a framework activity encompasses multiple actions and
work tasks, a stage pattern incorporates multiple task patterns (see the fol-
lowing) that are relevant to the stage (framework activity). An example of a
stage pattern might be EstablishingCommunication. This pattern would
incorporate the task pattern RequirementsGathering and others.
2.
Task pattern—defines a problem associated with a software engineering
action or work task and relevant to successful software engineering
practice (e.g., RequirementsGathering is a task pattern).
3.
Phase pattern—define the sequence of framework activities that occurs
within the process, even when the overall flow of activities is iterative
in nature. An example of a phase pattern might be SpiralModel or
Prototyping.3
CHAPTER 2
PROCESS MODELS
35
1
A detailed discussion of patterns is presented in Chapter 12.
2
Patterns are applicable to many software engineering activities. Analysis, design, and testing
patterns are discussed in Chapters 7, 9, 10, 12, and 14. Patterns and “antipatterns” for project
management activities are discussed in Part 4 of this book.
3
These phase patterns are discussed in Section 2.3.3.
What is a
process
pattern?
?
uote:
“The repetition of
patterns is quite a
different thing than
the repetition of
parts. Indeed, the
different parts will
be unique because
the patterns are the
same.”
Christopher
Alexander
A pattern template
provides a consistent
means for describing a
pattern.

Initial context.
Describes the conditions under which the pattern applies.
Prior to the initiation of the pattern: (1) What organizational or team-related ac-
tivities have already occurred? (2) What is the entry state for the process?
(3) What software engineering information or project information already exists?
For example, the Planning pattern (a stage pattern) requires that (1) cus-
tomers and software engineers have established a collaborative communi-
cation; (2) successful completion of a number of task patterns [specified] for
the Communication pattern has occurred; and (3) the project scope, basic
business requirements, and project constraints are known.
Problem.
The specific problem to be solved by the pattern.
Solution.
Describes how to implement the pattern successfully. This sec-
tion describes how the initial state of the process (that exists before the pat-
tern is implemented) is modified as a consequence of the initiation of the
pattern. It also describes how software engineering information or project
information that is available before the initiation of the pattern is transformed
as a consequence of the successful execution of the pattern.
Resulting Context.
Describes the conditions that will result once the pat-
tern has been successfully implemented. Upon completion of the pattern:
(1) What organizational or team-related activities must have occurred?
(2) What is the exit state for the process? (3) What software engineering
information or project information has been developed? 
Related Patterns.
Provide a list of all process patterns that are directly
related to this one. This may be represented as a hierarchy or in some other
diagrammatic form. For example, the stage pattern Communication
encompasses the task patterns: ProjectTeam, CollaborativeGuidelines,
ScopeIsolation, RequirementsGathering, ConstraintDescription, and
ScenarioCreation.
Known Uses and Examples.
Indicate the specific instances in which the
pattern is applicable. For example, Communication is mandatory at the
beginning of every software project, is recommended throughout the software
project, and is mandatory once the deployment activity is under way.
Process patterns provide an effective mechanism for addressing problems asso-
ciated with any software process. The patterns enable you to develop a hierarchical
process description that begins at a high level of abstraction (a phase pattern). The
description is then refined into a set of stage patterns that describe framework
activities and are further refined in a hierarchical fashion into more detailed task
patterns for each stage pattern. Once process patterns have been developed, they
can be reused for the definition of process variants—that is, a customized process
model can be defined by a software team using the patterns as building blocks for
the process model.
36
PART ONE
THE SOFTWARE PROCESS
WebRef
Comprehensive
resources on process
patterns can be found
at www.
ambysoft.com/
processPatternsPage
.html.

2.2
PROCESS ASSESSMENT AND IMPROVEMENT
The existence of a software process is no guarantee that software will be delivered
on time, that it will meet the customer’s needs, or that it will exhibit the technical
characteristics that will lead to long-term quality characteristics (Chapters 14 and
16). Process patterns must be coupled with solid software engineering practice
(Part 2 of this book). In addition, the process itself can be assessed to ensure that it
meets a set of basic process criteria that have been shown to be essential for a suc-
cessful software engineering.4
A number of different approaches to software process assessment and
improvement have been proposed over the past few decades:
Standard CMMI Assessment Method for Process Improvement
(SCAMPI)—provides a five-step process assessment model that incorporates
five phases: initiating, diagnosing, establishing, acting, and learning. The
SCAMPI method uses the SEI CMMI as the basis for assessment [SEI00].
CHAPTER 2
PROCESS MODELS
37
4
The SEI’s CMMI [CMM07] describes the characteristics of a software process and the criteria for a
successful process in voluminous detail.
Assessment attempts to
understand the current
state of the software
process with the intent
of improving it.
What formal
techniques
are available for
assessing the
software process?
?
INFO
An Example Process Pattern
The following abbreviated process pattern
describes an approach that may be applicable
when stakeholders have a general idea of what must be
done but are unsure of specific software requirements.
Pattern name. RequirementsUnclear
Intent. This pattern describes an approach for building a
model (a prototype) that can be assessed iteratively by
stakeholders in an effort to identify or solidify software
requirements.
Type. Phase pattern.
Initial context. The following conditions must be met
prior to the initiation of this pattern: (1) stakeholders have
been identified; (2) a mode of communication between
stakeholders and the software team has been established;
(3) the overriding software problem to be solved has been
identified by stakeholders; (4) an initial understanding of
project scope, basic business requirements, and project
constraints has been developed.
Problem. Requirements are hazy or nonexistent, yet
there is clear recognition that there is a problem to be
solved, and the problem must be addressed with a
software solution. Stakeholders are unsure of what they
want; that is, they cannot describe software requirements
in any detail.
Solution. A description of the prototyping process
would be presented here and is described later in
Section 2.3.3.
Resulting context. A software prototype that identifies
basic requirements (e.g., modes of interaction,
computational features, processing functions) is approved
by stakeholders. Following this, (1) the prototype may
evolve through a series of increments to become the
production software or (2) the prototype may be discarded
and the production software built using some other process
pattern.
Related patterns. The following patterns are related to
this pattern: CustomerCommunication,
IterativeDesign, IterativeDevelopment,
CustomerAssessment, RequirementExtraction.
Known uses and examples. Prototyping is
recommended when requirements are uncertain. 

CMM-Based Appraisal for Internal Process Improvement (CBA IPI)—
provides a diagnostic technique for assessing the relative maturity of a
software organization; uses the SEI CMM as the basis for the assessment
[Dun01].
SPICE (ISO/IEC15504)—a standard that defines a set of requirements for
software process assessment. The intent of the standard is to assist organi-
zations in developing an objective evaluation of the efficacy of any defined
software process [ISO08].
ISO 9001:2000 for Software—a generic standard that applies to any or-
ganization that wants to improve the overall quality of the products, systems,
or services that it provides. Therefore, the standard is directly applicable to
software organizations and companies [Ant06].
A more detailed discussion of software assessment and process improvement
methods is presented in Chapter 30.
2.3
PRESCRIPTIVE PROCESS MODELS
Prescriptive process models were originally proposed to bring order to the chaos
of software development. History has indicated that these traditional models
have brought a certain amount of useful structure to software engineering work and
have provided a reasonably effective road map for software teams. However, software
engineering work and the product that it produces remain on “the edge of chaos.”
In an intriguing paper on the strange relationship between order and chaos in the
software world, Nogueira and his colleagues [Nog00] state
The edge of chaos is defined as “a natural state between order and chaos, a grand com-
promise between structure and surprise” [Kau95]. The edge of chaos can be visualized as
an unstable, partially structured state. . . . It is unstable because it is constantly attracted
to chaos or to absolute order.
We have the tendency to think that order is the ideal state of nature. This could be a mis-
take. Research . . . supports the theory that operation away from equilibrium generates cre-
ativity, self-organized processes, and increasing returns [Roo96]. Absolute order means the
absence of variability, which could be an advantage under unpredictable environments.
Change occurs when there is some structure so that the change can be organized, but not
so rigid that it cannot occur. Too much chaos, on the other hand, can make coordination
and coherence impossible. Lack of structure does not always mean disorder.
The philosophical implications of this argument are significant for software engineer-
ing. If prescriptive process models5 strive for structure and order, are they inappropri-
ate for a software world that thrives on change? Yet, if we reject traditional process
38
PART ONE
THE SOFTWARE PROCESS
5
Prescriptive process models are sometimes referred to as “traditional” process models.
uote:
“Software
organizations have
exhibited
significant
shortcomings in
their ability to
capitalize on the
experiences gained
from completed
projects.”
NASA
uote:
“If the process is
right, the results
will take care of
themselves.”
Takashi Osada

models (and the order they imply) and replace them with something less structured,
do we make it impossible to achieve coordination and coherence in software work?
There are no easy answers to these questions, but there are alternatives available
to software engineers. In the sections that follow, I examine the prescriptive process
approach in which order and project consistency are dominant issues. I call them
“prescriptive” because they prescribe a set of process elements—framework activi-
ties, software engineering actions, tasks, work products, quality assurance, and
change control mechanisms for each project. Each process model also prescribes a
process flow (also called a work flow)—that is, the manner in which the process
elements are interrelated to one another.
All software process models can accommodate the generic framework activities
described in Chapter 1, but each applies a different emphasis to these activities and
defines a process flow that invokes each framework activity (as well as software
engineering actions and tasks) in a different manner.
2.3.1
The Waterfall Model
There are times when the requirements for a problem are well understood—when
work flows from communication through deployment in a reasonably linear fash-
ion. This situation is sometimes encountered when well-defined adaptations or en-
hancements to an existing system must be made (e.g., an adaptation to accounting
software that has been mandated because of changes to government regulations). It
may also occur in a limited number of new development efforts, but only when
requirements are well defined and reasonably stable.
The waterfall model, sometimes called the classic life cycle, suggests a systematic,
sequential approach6 to software development that begins with customer specifica-
tion of requirements and progresses through planning, modeling, construction, and
deployment, culminating in ongoing support of the completed software (Figure 2.3).
A variation in the representation of the waterfall model is called the V-model.
Represented in Figure 2.4, the V-model [Buc99] depicts the relationship of quality
CHAPTER 2
PROCESS MODELS
39
Communication
 
project initiation
 
requirements gathering
Planning
 
estimating
 
scheduling
 
tracking
Modeling
 
analysis
 
design
Deployment
 
delivery
 
support
 
feedback
Construction
 
code
 
test
FIGURE 2.3
The waterfall model
6
Although the original waterfall model proposed by Winston Royce [Roy70] made provision for
“feedback loops,” the vast majority of organizations that apply this process model treat it as if it
were strictly linear.
Prescriptive process
models define a
prescribed set of
process elements and
a predictable process
work flow.

assurance actions to the actions associated with communication, modeling, and
early construction activities. As a software team moves down the left side of the V,
basic problem requirements are refined into progressively more detailed and techni-
cal representations of the problem and its solution. Once code has been generated,
the team moves up the right side of the V, essentially performing a series of tests
(quality assurance actions) that validate each of the models created as the team
moved down the left side.7 In reality, there is no fundamental difference between the
classic life cycle and the V-model. The V-model provides a way of visualizing how
verification and validation actions are applied to earlier engineering work.
The waterfall model is the oldest paradigm for software engineering. However,
over the past three decades, criticism of this process model has caused even ardent
supporters to question its efficacy [Han95]. Among the problems that are sometimes
encountered when the waterfall model is applied are:
1.
Real projects rarely follow the sequential flow that the model proposes.
Although the linear model can accommodate iteration, it does so indirectly.
As a result, changes can cause confusion as the project team proceeds.
40
PART ONE
THE SOFTWARE PROCESS
7
A detailed discussion of quality assurance actions is presented in Part 3 of this book.
The V-model illustrates
how verification and
validation actions are
associated with earlier
engineering actions.
Why does
the waterfall
model sometimes
fail?
?
Code
generation
Architectural
design
Component
design
Requirements
modeling
Acceptance
testing
System
testing
Integration
testing
Unit
testing
Executable
software
FIGURE 2.4
The V-model

2.
It is often difficult for the customer to state all requirements explicitly. The
waterfall model requires this and has difficulty accommodating the natural
uncertainty that exists at the beginning of many projects.
3.
The customer must have patience. A working version of the program(s) will
not be available until late in the project time span. A major blunder, if unde-
tected until the working program is reviewed, can be disastrous.
In an interesting analysis of actual projects, Bradac [Bra94] found that the linear
nature of the classic life cycle leads to “blocking states” in which some project team
members must wait for other members of the team to complete dependent tasks. In
fact, the time spent waiting can exceed the time spent on productive work! The
blocking states tend to be more prevalent at the beginning and end of a linear
sequential process.
Today, software work is fast-paced and subject to a never-ending stream of
changes (to features, functions, and information content). The waterfall model is
often inappropriate for such work. However, it can serve as a useful process model
in situations where requirements are fixed and work is to proceed to completion in
a linear manner.
2.3.2
Incremental Process Models
There are many situations in which initial software requirements are reasonably well
defined, but the overall scope of the development effort precludes a purely linear
process. In addition, there may be a compelling need to provide a limited set of soft-
ware functionality to users quickly and then refine and expand on that functionality
in later software releases. In such cases, you can choose a process model that is
designed to produce the software in increments.
The incremental model combines elements of linear and parallel process flows
discussed in Section 2.1. Referring to Figure 2.5, the incremental model applies linear
sequences in a staggered fashion as calendar time progresses. Each linear sequence
produces deliverable “increments” of the software [McD93] in a manner that is sim-
ilar to the increments produced by an evolutionary process flow (Section 2.3.3).
For example, word-processing software developed using the incremental para-
digm might deliver basic file management, editing, and document production func-
tions in the first increment; more sophisticated editing and document production
capabilities in the second increment; spelling and grammar checking in the third in-
crement; and advanced page layout capability in the fourth increment. It should be
noted that the process flow for any increment can incorporate the prototyping
paradigm. 
When an incremental model is used, the first increment is often a core product.
That is, basic requirements are addressed but many supplementary features (some
known, others unknown) remain undelivered. The core product is used by the cus-
tomer (or undergoes detailed evaluation). As a result of use and/or evaluation, a
CHAPTER 2
PROCESS MODELS
41
uote:
“Too often,
software work
follows the first law
of bicycling: No
matter where
you’re going, it’s
uphill and against
the wind.”
Author unknown
The incremental model
delivers a series of
releases, called
increments, that
provide progressively
more functionality for
the customer as each
increment is delivered.
Your customer
demands delivery by a
date that is impossible
to meet. Suggest deliv-
ering one or more
increments by that
date and the rest of
the software (addi-
tional increments)
later.

plan is developed for the next increment. The plan addresses the modification of the
core product to better meet the needs of the customer and the delivery of additional
features and functionality. This process is repeated following the delivery of each
increment, until the complete product is produced.
The incremental process model focuses on the delivery of an operational product
with each increment. Early increments are stripped-down versions of the final prod-
uct, but they do provide capability that serves the user and also provide a platform
for evaluation by the user.8
Incremental development is particularly useful when staffing is unavailable for a
complete implementation by the business deadline that has been established for the
project. Early increments can be implemented with fewer people. If the core product
is well received, then additional staff (if required) can be added to implement the next
increment. In addition, increments can be planned to manage technical risks. For ex-
ample, a major system might require the availability of new hardware that is under
development and whose delivery date is uncertain. It might be possible to plan early
increments in a way that avoids the use of this hardware, thereby enabling partial
functionality to be delivered to end users without inordinate delay.
2.3.3
Evolutionary Process Models
Software, like all complex systems, evolves over a period of time. Business and prod-
uct requirements often change as development proceeds, making a straight line path
to an end product unrealistic; tight market deadlines make completion of a compre-
hensive software product impossible, but a limited version must be introduced to
42
PART ONE
THE SOFTWARE PROCESS
Evolutionary process
models produce an
increasingly more
complete version of
the software with each
iteration.
8
It is important to note that an incremental philosophy is also used for all “agile” process models dis-
cussed in Chapter 3.
increment # 1
increment # 2
delivery of
1st increment
delivery of
2nd increment
delivery of 
nth increment
increment # n
Project Calendar Time
Software Functionality and Features
Communication
Planning
Modeling (analysis, design)
Construction (code, test)
Deployment (delivery, feedback)
FIGURE 2.5
The 
incremental
model

meet competitive or business pressure; a set of core product or system requirements
is well understood, but the details of product or system extensions have yet to be
defined. In these and similar situations, you need a process model that has been
explicitly designed to accommodate a product that evolves over time.
Evolutionary models are iterative. They are characterized in a manner that
enables you to develop increasingly more complete versions of the software. In the
paragraphs that follow, I present two common evolutionary process models.
Prototyping.
Often, a customer defines a set of general objectives for software,
but does not identify detailed requirements for functions and features. In other
cases, the developer may be unsure of the efficiency of an algorithm, the adapt-
ability of an operating system, or the form that human-machine interaction should
take. In these, and many other situations, a prototyping paradigm may offer the best
approach.
Although prototyping can be used as a stand-alone process model, it is more com-
monly used as a technique that can be implemented within the context of any one
of the process models noted in this chapter. Regardless of the manner in which it is
applied, the prototyping paradigm assists you and other stakeholders to better
understand what is to be built when requirements are fuzzy.
The prototyping paradigm (Figure 2.6) begins with communication. You meet with
other stakeholders to define the overall objectives for the software, identify whatever
requirements are known, and outline areas where further definition is mandatory. A
prototyping iteration is planned quickly, and modeling (in the form of a “quick de-
sign”) occurs. A quick design focuses on a representation of those aspects of the soft-
ware that will be visible to end users (e.g., human interface layout or output display
CHAPTER 2
PROCESS MODELS
43
uote:
“Plan to throw one
away. You will do
that, anyway. Your
only choice is
whether to try to
sell the throwaway
to customers.”
Frederick P.
Brooks
When your customer
has a legitimate need,
but is clueless about
the details, develop a
prototype as a first
step.
Communication
Quick plan
Construction
of
prototype
Modeling
 Quick design
  
Deployment
  Delivery 
  & Feedback
FIGURE 2.6
The 
prototyping
paradigm

formats). The quick design leads to the construction of a prototype. The prototype is
deployed and evaluated by stakeholders, who provide feedback that is used to fur-
ther refine requirements. Iteration occurs as the prototype is tuned to satisfy the
needs of various stakeholders, while at the same time enabling you to better under-
stand what needs to be done.
Ideally, the prototype serves as a mechanism for identifying software require-
ments. If a working prototype is to be built, you can make use of existing program
fragments or apply tools (e.g., report generators and window managers) that enable
working programs to be generated quickly.
But what do you do with the prototype when it has served the purpose described
earlier? Brooks [Bro95] provides one answer:
In most projects, the first system built is barely usable. It may be too slow, too big, awk-
ward in use or all three. There is no alternative but to start again, smarting but smarter,
and build a redesigned version in which these problems are solved.
The prototype can serve as “the first system.” The one that Brooks recommends
you throw away. But this may be an idealized view. Although some prototypes are
built as “throwaways,” others are evolutionary in the sense that the prototype slowly
evolves into the actual system.
Both stakeholders and software engineers like the prototyping paradigm. Users
get a feel for the actual system, and developers get to build something immediately.
Yet, prototyping can be problematic for the following reasons:
1.
Stakeholders see what appears to be a working version of the software,
unaware that the prototype is held together haphazardly, unaware that in the
rush to get it working you haven’t considered overall software quality or
long-term maintainability. When informed that the product must be rebuilt so
that high levels of quality can be maintained, stakeholders cry foul and
demand that “a few fixes” be applied to make the prototype a working
product. Too often, software development management relents.
2.
As a software engineer, you often make implementation compromises in
order to get a prototype working quickly. An inappropriate operating system
or programming language may be used simply because it is available and
known; an inefficient algorithm may be implemented simply to demonstrate
capability. After a time, you may become comfortable with these choices and
forget all the reasons why they were inappropriate. The less-than-ideal
choice has now become an integral part of the system.
Although problems can occur, prototyping can be an effective paradigm for soft-
ware engineering. The key is to define the rules of the game at the beginning; that is,
all stakeholders should agree that the prototype is built to serve as a mechanism for
defining requirements. It is then discarded (at least in part), and the actual software
is engineered with an eye toward quality.
44
PART ONE
THE SOFTWARE PROCESS
Resist pressure to
extend a rough
prototype into a
production product.
Quality almost always
suffers as a result.

The Spiral Model.
Originally proposed by Barry Boehm [Boe88], the spiral model
is an evolutionary software process model that couples the iterative nature of proto-
typing with the controlled and systematic aspects of the waterfall model. It provides
the potential for rapid development of increasingly more complete versions of the
software. Boehm [Boe01a] describes the model in the following manner:
The spiral development model is a risk-driven process model generator that is used to
guide multi-stakeholder concurrent engineering of software intensive systems. It has two
main distinguishing features. One is a cyclic approach for incrementally growing a sys-
tem’s degree of definition and implementation while decreasing its degree of risk. The
other is a set of anchor point milestones for ensuring stakeholder commitment to feasible
and mutually satisfactory system solutions.
Using the spiral model, software is developed in a series of evolutionary releases.
During early iterations, the release might be a model or prototype. During later iter-
ations, increasingly more complete versions of the engineered system are produced.
CHAPTER 2
PROCESS MODELS
45
The scene: Meeting room for the
software engineering group at CPI Corporation, a
(fictional) company that makes consumer products for
home and commercial use.
The players: Lee Warren, engineering manager; Doug
Miller, software engineering manager; Jamie Lazar,
software team member; Vinod Raman, software team
member; and Ed Robbins, software team member.
The conversation:
Lee: So let’s recapitulate. I’ve spent some time discussing
the SafeHome product line as we see it at the moment.
No doubt, we’ve got a lot of work to do to simply define
the thing, but I’d like you guys to begin thinking about
how you’re going to approach the software part of this
project.
Doug: Seems like we’ve been pretty disorganized in our
approach to software in the past.
Ed: I don’t know, Doug, we always got product out
the door.
Doug: True, but not without a lot of grief, and this
project looks like it’s bigger and more complex than
anything we’ve done in the past.
Jamie: Doesn’t look that hard, but I agree . . . our
ad hoc approach to past projects won’t work here,
particularly if we have a very tight time line.
Doug (smiling): I want to be a bit more professional in
our approach. I went to a short course last week and
learned a lot about software engineering . . . good stuff.
We need a process here.
Jamie (with a frown): My job is to build computer
programs, not push paper around.
Doug: Give it a chance before you go negative on
me. Here’s what I mean. [Doug proceeds to describe
the process framework described in this chapter and
the prescriptive process models presented to this 
point.]
Doug: So anyway, it seems to me that a linear model is
not for us . . . assumes we have all requirements up front
and, knowing this place, that’s not likely.
Vinod: Yeah, and it sounds way too IT-oriented . . .
probably good for building an inventory control system
or something, but it’s just not right for SafeHome.
Doug: I agree.
Ed: That prototyping approach seems OK. A lot like what
we do here anyway.
Vinod: That’s a problem. I’m worried that it doesn’t
provide us with enough structure.
Doug: Not to worry. We’ve got plenty of other options,
and I want you guys to pick what’s best for the team and
best for the project.
SAFEHOME
Selecting a Process Model, Part 1

A spiral model is divided into a set of framework activities defined by the software
engineering team. For illustrative purposes, I use the generic framework activities
discussed earlier.9 Each of the framework activities represent one segment of the spi-
ral path illustrated in Figure 2.7. As this evolutionary process begins, the software
team performs activities that are implied by a circuit around the spiral in a clockwise
direction, beginning at the center. Risk (Chapter 28) is considered as each revolution
is made. Anchor point milestones—a combination of work products and conditions
that are attained along the path of the spiral—are noted for each evolutionary pass.
The first circuit around the spiral might result in the development of a product
specification; subsequent passes around the spiral might be used to develop a pro-
totype and then progressively more sophisticated versions of the software. Each pass
through the planning region results in adjustments to the project plan. Cost and
schedule are adjusted based on feedback derived from the customer after delivery.
In addition, the project manager adjusts the planned number of iterations required
to complete the software.
Unlike other process models that end when software is delivered, the spiral model
can be adapted to apply throughout the life of the computer software. Therefore, the
first circuit around the spiral might represent a “concept development project” that
starts at the core of the spiral and continues for multiple iterations10 until concept
46
PART ONE
THE SOFTWARE PROCESS
9
The spiral model discussed in this section is a variation on the model proposed by Boehm. For
further information on the original spiral model, see [Boe88]. More recent discussion of Boehm’s
spiral model can be found in [Boe98].
10 The arrows pointing inward along the axis separating the deployment region from the commu-
nication region indicate a potential for local iteration along the same spiral path.
Communication
Planning 
Modeling
Construction
Deployment 
delivery 
feedback
Start
analysis 
design
code 
test
estimation 
scheduling 
risk analysis
FIGURE 2.7
A typical
spiral model
The spiral model can
be adapted to apply
throughout the entire
life cycle of an
application, from
concept development
to maintenance.
WebRef
Useful information
about the spiral model
can be obtained at:
www.sei.cmu
.edu/publications/
documents/00
.reports/00sr008
.html.

development is complete. If the concept is to be developed into an actual product,
the process proceeds outward on the spiral and a “new product development proj-
ect” commences. The new product will evolve through a number of iterations around
the spiral. Later, a circuit around the spiral might be used to represent a “product en-
hancement project.” In essence, the spiral, when characterized in this way, remains
operative until the software is retired. There are times when the process is dormant,
but whenever a change is initiated, the process starts at the appropriate entry point
(e.g., product enhancement).
The spiral model is a realistic approach to the development of large-scale systems
and software. Because software evolves as the process progresses, the developer
and customer better understand and react to risks at each evolutionary level. The
spiral model uses prototyping as a risk reduction mechanism but, more important,
enables you to apply the prototyping approach at any stage in the evolution of the
product. It maintains the systematic stepwise approach suggested by the classic life
cycle but incorporates it into an iterative framework that more realistically reflects
the real world. The spiral model demands a direct consideration of technical risks at
all stages of the project and, if properly applied, should reduce risks before they
become problematic.
But like other paradigms, the spiral model is not a panacea. It may be difficult to
convince customers (particularly in contract situations) that the evolutionary
approach is controllable. It demands considerable risk assessment expertise and
relies on this expertise for success. If a major risk is not uncovered and managed,
problems will undoubtedly occur.
CHAPTER 2
PROCESS MODELS
47
If your management
demands fixed-budget
development
(generally a bad idea),
the spiral can be a
problem. As each
circuit is completed,
project cost is revisited
and revised.
uote:
“I’m only this far
and only tomorrow
leads my way.”
Dave Matthews
Band
The scene: Meeting room for the
software engineering group at CPI Corporation, a
company that makes consumer products for home and
commercial use.
The players: Lee Warren, engineering manager; Doug
Miller, software engineering manager; Vinod and Jamie,
members of the software engineering team.
The conversation: [Doug describes evolutionary
process options.]
Jamie: Now I see something I like. An incremental
approach makes sense, and I really like the flow of that
spiral model thing. That’s keepin’ it real.
Vinod: I agree. We deliver an increment, learn from
customer feedback, replan, and then deliver another
increment. It also fits into the nature of the product. We
can have something on the market fast and then add
functionality with each version, er, increment.
Lee: Wait a minute. Did you say that we regenerate the
plan with each tour around the spiral, Doug? That’s not so
great; we need one plan, one schedule, and we’ve got to
stick to it.
Doug: That’s old-school thinking, Lee. Like the guys said,
we’ve got to keep it real. I submit that it’s better to tweak
the plan as we learn more and as changes are requested.
It’s way more realistic. What’s the point of a plan if it
doesn’t reflect reality?
Lee (frowning): I suppose so, but . . . senior management’s
not going to like this . . . they want a fixed plan.
Doug (smiling): Then you’ll have to reeducate them,
buddy.
SAFEHOME
Selecting a Process Model, Part 2

2.3.4
Concurrent Models
The concurrent development model, sometimes called concurrent engineering, allows
a software team to represent iterative and concurrent elements of any of the process
models described in this chapter. For example, the modeling activity defined for the
spiral model is accomplished by invoking one or more of the following software
engineering actions: prototyping, analysis, and design.11
Figure 2.8 provides a schematic representation of one software engineering
activity within the modeling activity using a concurrent modeling approach. The
activity—modeling—may be in any one of the states12 noted at any given time. Sim-
ilarly, other activities, actions, or tasks (e.g., communication or construction) can
be represented in an analogous manner. All software engineering activities exist
concurrently but reside in different states.
48
PART ONE
THE SOFTWARE PROCESS
11 It should be noted that analysis and design are complex tasks that require substantial discussion.
Part 2 of this book considers these topics in detail.
12 A state is some externally observable mode of behavior.
Under review
Baselined
Under
revision
Awaiting
changes
Under
development
Inactive
Modeling activity
Represents the state 
of a software engineering 
activity or task 
Done
FIGURE 2.8
One element of
the concurrent
process model
The concurrent model
is often more appro-
priate for product engi-
neering projects where
different engineering
teams are involved.

For example, early in a project the communication activity (not shown in the figure)
has completed its first iteration and exists in the awaiting changes state. The model-
ing activity (which existed in the inactive state while initial communication was com-
pleted, now makes a transition into the under development state. If, however, the
customer indicates that changes in requirements must be made, the modeling activity
moves from the under development state into the awaiting changes state.
Concurrent modeling defines a series of events that will trigger transitions from
state to state for each of the software engineering activities, actions, or tasks. For
example, during early stages of design (a major software engineering action that
occurs during the modeling activity), an inconsistency in the requirements model is
uncovered. This generates the event analysis model correction, which will trigger the
requirements analysis action from the done state into the awaiting changes state.
Concurrent modeling is applicable to all types of software development and pro-
vides an accurate picture of the current state of a project. Rather than confining soft-
ware engineering activities, actions, and tasks to a sequence of events, it defines a
process network. Each activity, action, or task on the network exists simultaneously
with other activities, actions, or tasks. Events generated at one point in the process
network trigger transitions among the states.
2.3.5
A Final Word on Evolutionary Processes
I have already noted that modern computer software is characterized by continual
change, by very tight time lines, and by an emphatic need for customer–user
satisfaction. In many cases, time-to-market is the most important management
requirement. If a market window is missed, the software project itself may be
meaningless.13
Evolutionary process models were conceived to address these issues, and yet, as
a general class of process models, they too have weaknesses. These are summarized
by Nogueira and his colleagues [Nog00] : 
Despite the unquestionable benefits of evolutionary software processes, we have some
concerns. The first concern is that prototyping [and other more sophisticated evolution-
ary processes] poses a problem to project planning because of the uncertain number of
cycles required to construct the product. Most project management and estimation tech-
niques are based on linear layouts of activities, so they do not fit completely. 
Second, evolutionary software processes do not establish the maximum speed of the
evolution. If the evolutions occur too fast, without a period of relaxation, it is certain that
the process will fall into chaos. On the other hand if the speed is too slow then produc-
tivity could be affected . . .
CHAPTER 2
PROCESS MODELS
49
13 It is important to note, however, that being the first to reach a market is no guarantee of success.
In fact, many very successful software products have been second or even third to reach the market
(learning from the mistakes of their predecessors).
uote:
“Every process in
your organization
has a customer,
and without a
customer a process
has no purpose.”
V. Daniel Hunt

Third, software processes should be focused on flexibility and extensibility rather than
on high quality. This assertion sounds scary. However, we should prioritize the speed of
the development over zero defects. Extending the development in order to reach high
quality could result in a late delivery of the product, when the opportunity niche has
disappeared. This paradigm shift is imposed by the competition on the edge of chaos.
Indeed, a software process that focuses on flexibility, extensibility, and speed of de-
velopment over high quality does sound scary. And yet, this idea has been proposed
by a number of well-respected software engineering experts (e.g., [You95], [Bac97]).
The intent of evolutionary models is to develop high-quality software14 in an iter-
ative or incremental manner. However, it is possible to use an evolutionary process
to emphasize flexibility, extensibility, and speed of development. The challenge for
software teams and their managers is to establish a proper balance between these
critical project and product parameters and customer satisfaction (the ultimate
arbiter of software quality).
2.4
SPECIALIZED PROCESS MODELS
Specialized process models take on many of the characteristics of one or more of the
traditional models presented in the preceding sections. However, these models tend
to be applied when a specialized or narrowly defined software engineering approach
is chosen.15
2.4.1
Component-Based Development
Commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) software components, developed by vendors who
offer them as products, provide targeted functionality with well-defined interfaces
that enable the component to be integrated into the software that is to be built. The
component-based development model incorporates many of the characteristics of the
spiral model. It is evolutionary in nature [Nie92], demanding an iterative approach to
the creation of software. However, the component-based development model con-
structs applications from prepackaged software components.
Modeling and construction activities begin with the identification of candidate
components. These components can be designed as either conventional software
modules or object-oriented classes or packages16 of classes. Regardless of the
50
PART ONE
THE SOFTWARE PROCESS
14 In this context software quality is defined quite broadly to encompass not only customer satisfac-
tion, but also a variety of technical criteria discussed in Chapters 14 and 16.
15 In some cases, these specialized process models might better be characterized as a collection of
techniques or a “methodology” for accomplishing a specific software development goal. However,
they do imply a process.
16 Object-oriented concepts are discussed in Appendix 2 and are used throughout Part 2 of this book.
In this context, a class encompasses a set of data and the procedures that process the data. A pack-
age of classes is a collection of related classes that work together to achieve some end result.
WebRef
Useful information on
component-based
development can be
obtained at: www
.cbd-hq.com.

technology that is used to create the components, the component-based develop-
ment model incorporates the following steps (implemented using an evolutionary
approach):
1.
Available component-based products are researched and evaluated for the
application domain in question.
2.
Component integration issues are considered.
3.
A software architecture is designed to accommodate the components.
4.
Components are integrated into the architecture.
5.
Comprehensive testing is conducted to ensure proper functionality.
The component-based development model leads to software reuse, and reusabil-
ity provides software engineers with a number of measurable benefits. Your software
engineering team can achieve a reduction in development cycle time as well as a
reduction in project cost if component reuse becomes part of your culture. Component-
based development is discussed in more detail in Chapter 10.
2.4.2
The Formal Methods Model
The formal methods model encompasses a set of activities that leads to formal math-
ematical specification of computer software. Formal methods enable you to specify,
develop, and verify a computer-based system by applying a rigorous, mathematical
notation. A variation on this approach, called cleanroom software engineering [Mil87,
Dye92], is currently applied by some software development organizations.
When formal methods (Chapter 21) are used during development, they provide a
mechanism for eliminating many of the problems that are difficult to overcome using
other software engineering paradigms. Ambiguity, incompleteness, and inconsis-
tency can be discovered and corrected more easily—not through ad hoc review, but
through the application of mathematical analysis. When formal methods are used
during design, they serve as a basis for program verification and therefore enable
you to discover and correct errors that might otherwise go undetected.
Although not a mainstream approach, the formal methods model offers the prom-
ise of defect-free software. Yet, concern about its applicability in a business envi-
ronment has been voiced:
• The development of formal models is currently quite time consuming and
expensive.
• Because few software developers have the necessary background to apply
formal methods, extensive training is required.
• It is difficult to use the models as a communication mechanism for techni-
cally unsophisticated customers.
These concerns notwithstanding, the formal methods approach has gained
adherents among software developers who must build safety-critical software 
CHAPTER 2
PROCESS MODELS
51
If formal
methods can
demonstrate
software
correctness, why
is it they are not
widely used?
?

(e.g., developers of aircraft avionics and medical devices) and among developers
that would suffer severe economic hardship should software errors occur. 
2.4.3
Aspect-Oriented Software Development
Regardless of the software process that is chosen, the builders of complex software
invariably implement a set of localized features, functions, and information content.
These localized software characteristics are modeled as components (e.g., object-
oriented classes) and then constructed within the context of a system architecture.
As modern computer-based systems become more sophisticated (and complex),
certain concerns—customer required properties or areas of technical interest—span
the entire architecture. Some concerns are high-level properties of a system (e.g.,
security, fault tolerance). Other concerns affect functions (e.g., the application of
business rules), while others are systemic (e.g., task synchronization or memory
management).
When concerns cut across multiple system functions, features, and information,
they are often referred to as crosscutting concerns. Aspectual requirements define
those crosscutting concerns that have an impact across the software architecture.
Aspect-oriented software development (AOSD), often referred to as aspect-oriented
programming (AOP), is a relatively new software engineering paradigm that provides
a process and methodological approach for defining, specifying, designing, and con-
structing aspects—“mechanisms beyond subroutines and inheritance for localizing
the expression of a crosscutting concern” [Elr01].
Grundy [Gru02] provides further discussion of aspects in the context of what he
calls aspect-oriented component engineering (AOCE):
AOCE uses a concept of horizontal slices through vertically-decomposed software com-
ponents, called “aspects,” to characterize cross-cutting functional and non-functional
properties of components. Common, systemic aspects include user interfaces, collabora-
tive work, distribution, persistency, memory management, transaction processing, secu-
rity, integrity and so on. Components may provide or require one or more “aspect details”
relating to a particular aspect, such as a viewing mechanism, extensible affordance and
interface kind (user interface aspects); event generation, transport and receiving
(distribution aspects); data store/retrieve and indexing (persistency aspects); authentica-
tion, encoding and access rights (security aspects); transaction atomicity, concurrency
control and logging strategy (transaction aspects); and so on. Each aspect detail has a
number of properties, relating to functional and/or non-functional characteristics of the
aspect detail.
A distinct aspect-oriented process has not yet matured. However, it is likely that
such a process will adopt characteristics of both evolutionary and concurrent
process models. The evolutionary model is appropriate as aspects are identified and
then constructed. The parallel nature of concurrent development is essential be-
cause aspects are engineered independently of localized software components and
yet, aspects have a direct impact on these components. Hence, it is essential to
52
PART ONE
THE SOFTWARE PROCESS
WebRef
A wide array of
resources and
information on AOP
can be found at:
aosd.net.
AOSD defines
“aspects” that express
customer concerns that
cut across multiple
system functions,
features, and
information.

instantiate asynchronous communication between the software process activities
applied to the engineering and construction of aspects and components.
A detailed discussion of aspect-oriented software development is best left to
books dedicated to the subject. If you have further interest, see [Saf08], [Cla05],
[Jac04], and [Gra03].
CHAPTER 2
PROCESS MODELS
53
17 Tools noted here do not represent an endorsement, but rather a sampling of tools in this category.
In most cases, tool names are trademarked by their respective developers.
Process Management
Objective: To assist in the definition,
execution, and management of prescriptive
process models.
Mechanics: Process management tools allow a software
organization or team to define a complete software
process model (framework activities, actions, tasks, QA
checkpoints, milestones, and work products). In addition,
the tools provide a road map as software engineers do
technical work and a template for managers who must
track and control the software process.
Representative Tools:17
GDPA, a research process definition tool suite, developed at
Bremen University in Germany (www.informatik
.uni-bremen.de/uniform/gdpa/home.htm),
provides a wide array of process modeling and
management functions.
SpeeDev, developed by SpeeDev Corporation
(www.speedev.com) encompasses a suite of tools
for process definition, requirements management, issue
resolution, project planning, and tracking.
ProVision BPMx, developed by Proforma
(www.proformacorp.com), is representative of
many tools that assist in process definition and
workflow automation.
A worthwhile listing of many different tools associated 
with the software process can be found at www
.processwave.net/Links/tool_links.htm.
SOFTWARE TOOLS
2.5
THE UNIFIED PROCESS
In their seminal book on the Unified Process, Ivar Jacobson, Grady Booch, and James
Rumbaugh [Jac99] discuss the need for a “use case driven, architecture-centric, iter-
ative and incremental” software process when they state:
Today, the trend in software is toward bigger, more complex systems. That is due in part
to the fact that computers become more powerful every year, leading users to expect
more from them. This trend has also been influenced by the expanding use of the Inter-
net for exchanging all kinds of information. . . . Our appetite for ever-more sophisticated
software grows as we learn from one product release to the next how the product could
be improved. We want software that is better adapted to our needs, but that, in turn,
merely makes the software more complex. In short, we want more.
In some ways the Unified Process is an attempt to draw on the best features and
characteristics of traditional software process models, but characterize them in a
way that implements many of the best principles of agile software development

(Chapter 3). The Unified Process recognizes the importance of customer communi-
cation and streamlined methods for describing the customer’s view of a system
(the use case18). It emphasizes the important role of software architecture and
“helps the architect focus on the right goals, such as understandability, reliance to
future changes, and reuse” [Jac99]. It suggests a process flow that is iterative and
incremental, providing the evolutionary feel that is essential in modern software
development.
2.5.1
A Brief History
During the early 1990s James Rumbaugh [Rum91], Grady Booch [Boo94], and Ivar
Jacobson [Jac92] began working on a “unified method” that would combine the best
features of each of their individual object-oriented analysis and design methods and
adopt additional features proposed by other experts (e.g., [Wir90]) in object-oriented
modeling. The result was UML—a unified modeling language that contains a robust
notation for the modeling and development of object-oriented systems. By 1997,
UML became a de facto industry standard for object-oriented software development.
UML is used throughout Part 2 of this book to represent both requirements and
design models. Appendix 1 presents an introductory tutorial for those who are unfa-
miliar with basic UML notation and modeling rules. A comprehensive presentation
of UML is best left to textbooks dedicated to the subject. Recommended books are
listed in Appendix 1.
UML provided the necessary technology to support object-oriented software engi-
neering practice, but it did not provide the process framework to guide project teams
in their application of the technology. Over the next few years, Jacobson, Rumbaugh,
and Booch developed the Unified Process, a framework for object-oriented software
engineering using UML. Today, the Unified Process (UP) and UML are widely used on
object-oriented projects of all kinds. The iterative, incremental model proposed by the
UP can and should be adapted to meet specific project needs. 
2.5.2
Phases of the Unified Process19
Earlier in this chapter, I discussed five generic framework activities and argued that
they may be used to describe any software process model. The Unified Process is no
exception. Figure 2.9 depicts the “phases” of the UP and relates them to the generic
activities that have been discussed in Chapter 1 and earlier in this chapter. 
54
PART ONE
THE SOFTWARE PROCESS
18 A use case (Chapter 5) is a text narrative or template that describes a system function or feature
from the user’s point of view. A use case is written by the user and serves as a basis for the creation
of a more comprehensive requirements model.
19 The Unified Process is sometimes called the Rational Unified Process (RUP) after the Rational Cor-
poration (subsequently acquired by IBM), an early contributor to the development and refinement
of the UP and a builder of complete environments (tools and technology) that support the process.

The inception phase of the UP encompasses both customer communication and
planning activities. By collaborating with stakeholders, business requirements for
the software are identified; a rough architecture for the system is proposed; and a
plan for the iterative, incremental nature of the ensuing project is developed.
Fundamental business requirements are described through a set of preliminary use
cases (Chapter 5) that describe which features and functions each major class of
users desires. Architecture at this point is nothing more than a tentative outline of
major subsystems and the function and features that populate them. Later, the ar-
chitecture will be refined and expanded into a set of models that will represent
different views of the system. Planning identifies resources, assesses major risks,
defines a schedule, and establishes a basis for the phases that are to be applied as
the software increment is developed.
The elaboration phase encompasses the communication and modeling activities of
the generic process model (Figure 2.9). Elaboration refines and expands the prelimi-
nary use cases that were developed as part of the inception phase and expands the
architectural representation to include five different views of the software—the use
case model, the requirements model, the design model, the implementation model,
and the deployment model. In some cases, elaboration creates an “executable
architectural baseline” [Arl02] that represents a “first cut” executable system.20 The
architectural baseline demonstrates the viability of the architecture but does not
provide all features and functions required to use the system. In addition, the plan is
carefully reviewed at the culmination of the elaboration phase to ensure that scope,
risks, and delivery dates remain reasonable. Modifications to the plan are often made
at this time.
CHAPTER 2
PROCESS MODELS
55
Transition
Production
software increment
Release
modeling
construction
planning
communication
deployment
Construction
Inception
Elaboration
FIGURE 2.9
The Unified
Process
UP phases are similar
in intent to the generic
framework activities
defined in this book.
20 It is important to note that the architectural baseline is not a prototype in that it is not thrown away.
Rather, the baseline is fleshed out during the next UP phase.

The construction phase of the UP is identical to the construction activity defined
for the generic software process. Using the architectural model as input, the con-
struction phase develops or acquires the software components that will make each
use case operational for end users. To accomplish this, requirements and design
models that were started during the elaboration phase are completed to reflect the
final version of the software increment. All necessary and required features and
functions for the software increment (i.e., the release) are then implemented in
source code. As components are being implemented, unit tests21 are designed and
executed for each. In addition, integration activities (component assembly and inte-
gration testing) are conducted. Use cases are used to derive a suite of acceptance
tests that are executed prior to the initiation of the next UP phase.
The transition phase of the UP encompasses the latter stages of the generic con-
struction activity and the first part of the generic deployment (delivery and feedback)
activity. Software is given to end users for beta testing and user feedback reports
both defects and necessary changes. In addition, the software team creates the nec-
essary support information (e.g., user manuals, troubleshooting guides, installation
procedures) that is required for the release. At the conclusion of the transition phase,
the software increment becomes a usable software release.
The production phase of the UP coincides with the deployment activity of the
generic process. During this phase, the ongoing use of the software is monitored,
support for the operating environment (infrastructure) is provided, and defect reports
and requests for changes are submitted and evaluated.
It is likely that at the same time the construction, transition, and production
phases are being conducted, work may have already begun on the next software
increment. This means that the five UP phases do not occur in a sequence, but rather
with staggered concurrency.
A software engineering workflow is distributed across all UP phases. In the con-
text of UP, a workflow is analogous to a task set (described earlier in this chapter).
That is, a workflow identifies the tasks required to accomplish an important software
engineering action and the work products that are produced as a consequence of
successfully completing the tasks. It should be noted that not every task identified for
a UP workflow is conducted for every software project. The team adapts the process
(actions, tasks, subtasks, and work products) to meet its needs. 
2.6
PERSONAL AND TEAM PROCESS MODELS
The best software process is one that is close to the people who will be doing the
work. If a software process model has been developed at a corporate or organiza-
tional level, it can be effective only if it is amenable to significant adaptation to meet
56
PART ONE
THE SOFTWARE PROCESS
21 A comprehensive discussion of software testing (including unit tests) is presented in Chapters 17
through 20.
WebRef
An interesting
discussion of the UP in
the context of agile
development can be
found at
www.ambysoft
.com/
unifiedprocess/
agileUP.html.

the needs of the project team that is actually doing software engineering work. In an
ideal setting, you would create a process that best fits your needs, and at the same
time, meets the broader needs of the team and the organization. Alternatively, the
team itself can create its own process, and at the same time meet the narrower needs
of individuals and the broader needs of the organization. Watts Humphrey ([Hum97]
and [Hum00]) argues that it is possible to create a “personal software process”
and/or a “team software process.” Both require hard work, training, and coordina-
tion, but both are achievable.22
2.6.1
Personal Software Process (PSP)
Every developer uses some process to build computer software. The process may be
haphazard or ad hoc; may change on a daily basis; may not be efficient, effective, or
even successful; but a “process” does exist. Watts Humphrey [Hum97] suggests that
in order to change an ineffective personal process, an individual must move through
four phases, each requiring training and careful instrumentation. The Personal Soft-
ware Process (PSP) emphasizes personal measurement of both the work product that
is produced and the resultant quality of the work product. In addition PSP makes the
practitioner responsible for project planning (e.g., estimating and scheduling) and
empowers the practitioner to control the quality of all software work products that
are developed. The PSP model defines five framework activities: 
Planning.
This activity isolates requirements and develops both size and
resource estimates. In addition, a defect estimate (the number of defects
projected for the work) is made. All metrics are recorded on worksheets or
templates. Finally, development tasks are identified and a project schedule is
created.
High-level design.
External specifications for each component to be con-
structed are developed and a component design is created. Prototypes are
built when uncertainty exists. All issues are recorded and tracked.
High-level design review.
Formal verification methods (Chapter 21) are
applied to uncover errors in the design. Metrics are maintained for all impor-
tant tasks and work results.
Development.
The component-level design is refined and reviewed. Code
is generated, reviewed, compiled, and tested. Metrics are maintained for all
important tasks and work results.
Postmortem.
Using the measures and metrics collected (this is a substan-
tial amount of data that should be analyzed statistically), the effectiveness of
the process is determined. Measures and metrics should provide guidance for
modifying the process to improve its effectiveness.
CHAPTER 2
PROCESS MODELS
57
22 It’s worth noting the proponents of agile software development (Chapter 3) also argue that the
process should remain close to the team. They propose an alternative method for achieving this.
uote:
“A person who is
successful has
simply formed the
habit of doing
things that
unsuccessful people
will not do.”
Dexter Yager
WebRef
A wide array of
resources for PSP can
be found at www
.ipd.uka.de/PSP/.
What
framework
activities are used
during PSP?
?

PSP stresses the need to identify errors early and, just as important, to understand
the types of errors that you are likely to make. This is accomplished through a rigor-
ous assessment activity performed on all work products you produce.
PSP represents a disciplined, metrics-based approach to software engineering
that may lead to culture shock for many practitioners. However, when PSP is prop-
erly introduced to software engineers [Hum96], the resulting improvement in soft-
ware engineering productivity and software quality are significant [Fer97]. However,
PSP has not been widely adopted throughout the industry. The reasons, sadly, have
more to do with human nature and organizational inertia than they do with the
strengths and weaknesses of the PSP approach. PSP is intellectually challenging and
demands a level of commitment (by practitioners and their managers) that is not al-
ways possible to obtain. Training is relatively lengthy, and training costs are high.
The required level of measurement is culturally difficult for many software people.
Can PSP be used as an effective software process at a personal level? The answer
is an unequivocal “yes.” But even if PSP is not adopted in its entirely, many of the
personal process improvement concepts that it introduces are well worth learning. 
2.6.2
Team Software Process (TSP)
Because many industry-grade software projects are addressed by a team of practi-
tioners, Watts Humphrey extended the lessons learned from the introduction of PSP
and proposed a Team Software Process (TSP). The goal of TSP is to build a “self-
directed” project team that organizes itself to produce high-quality software.
Humphrey [Hum98] defines the following objectives for TSP:
• Build self-directed teams that plan and track their work, establish goals, and
own their processes and plans. These can be pure software teams or inte-
grated product teams (IPTs) of 3 to about 20 engineers. 
• Show managers how to coach and motivate their teams and how to help
them sustain peak performance. 
• Accelerate software process improvement by making CMM23 Level 5
behavior normal and expected. 
• Provide improvement guidance to high-maturity organizations. 
• Facilitate university teaching of industrial-grade team skills.
A self-directed team has a consistent understanding of its overall goals and objec-
tives; defines roles and responsibilities for each team member; tracks quantitative
project data (about productivity and quality); identifies a team process that is appro-
priate for the project and a strategy for implementing the process; defines local stan-
dards that are applicable to the team’s software engineering work; continually
assesses risk and reacts to it; and tracks, manages, and reports project status.
58
PART ONE
THE SOFTWARE PROCESS
PSP emphasizes the
need to record and
analyze the types of
errors you make, so
that you can develop
strategies to eliminate
them.
To form a self-directed
team, you must collab-
orate well internally
and communicate well
externally.
WebRef
Information on building
high-performance teams
using TSP and PSP can
be obtained at:
www.sei.cmu
.edu/tsp/.
23 The Capability Maturity Model (CMM), a measure of the effectiveness of a software process, is
discussed in Chapter 30.

TSP defines the following framework activities: project launch, high-level
design, implementation, integration and test, and postmortem. Like their
counterparts in PSP (note that terminology is somewhat different), these activities
enable the team to plan, design, and construct software in a disciplined manner
while at the same time quantitatively measuring the process and the product. The
postmortem sets the stage for process improvements.
TSP makes use of a wide variety of scripts, forms, and standards that serve to guide
team members in their work. “Scripts” define specific process activities (i.e., project
launch, design, implementation, integration and system testing, postmortem) and other
more detailed work functions (e.g., development planning, requirements development,
software configuration management, unit test) that are part of the team process.
TSP recognizes that the best software teams are self-directed.24 Team members
set project objectives, adapt the process to meet their needs, control the project
schedule, and through measurement and analysis of the metrics collected, work con-
tinually to improve the team’s approach to software engineering.
Like PSP, TSP is a rigorous approach to software engineering that provides dis-
tinct and quantifiable benefits in productivity and quality. The team must make a full
commitment to the process and must undergo thorough training to ensure that the
approach is properly applied. 
2.7
PROCESS TECHNOLOGY
One or more of the process models discussed in the preceding sections must be
adapted for use by a software team. To accomplish this, process technology tools have
been developed to help software organizations analyze their current process,
organize work tasks, control and monitor progress, and manage technical quality.
Process technology tools allow a software organization to build an automated
model of the process framework, task sets, and umbrella activities discussed in
Section 2.1. The model, normally represented as a network, can then be analyzed to
determine typical workflow and examine alternative process structures that might
lead to reduced development time or cost.
Once an acceptable process has been created, other process technology tools can
be used to allocate, monitor, and even control all software engineering activities,
actions, and tasks defined as part of the process model. Each member of a software
team can use such tools to develop a checklist of work tasks to be performed, work
products to be produced, and quality assurance activities to be conducted. The
process technology tool can also be used to coordinate the use of other software en-
gineering tools that are appropriate for a particular work task.
CHAPTER 2
PROCESS MODELS
59
24 In Chapter 3 I discuss the importance of “self-organizing” teams as a key element in agile software
development.
TSP scripts define
elements of the team
process and activities
that occur within the
process.
