1
 OBJECTIVES
When you have completed this chapter you will be able to:
deﬁ ne the scope of ‘software project management’;
•
understand some problems and concerns of software project managers;
•
deﬁ ne the usual stages of a software project;
•
explain the main elements of the role of management;
•
appreciate the need for careful planning, monitoring and control;
•
identify the stakeholders of a project and their objectives;
•
deﬁ ne the success criteria for a project.
•
1.1 Introduction
This textbook is about ‘software project management’. The ﬁ rst question is whether the management of 
software projects is really that different from that of other projects. To answer this, we need to look at some 
key ideas about the planning, monitoring and control of software projects. We will see that all projects are 
about meeting objectives. Like any other project, a software project must satisfy real needs. To do this we 
must identify the project’s stakeholders and their objectives. Ensuring that their objectives are met is the aim 
of project management. However, we cannot know that a project will meet its objectives in the future unless 
we know the present state of the project.
1.2 Why is Soft ware Project Management Important?
This book is for students of software engineering and computer science and also those studying business 
information systems. More technically oriented students can be impatient at having to study something which 
keeps them away from their code. So why is it important to become familiar with project management?
MODULE 4

2
So ware Project Management
First, there is the question of money. A lot of money is at stake with ICT projects. In the 
United Kingdom during the ﬁ nancial year 2002–2003, the central government spent 
more on contracts for ICT projects than on contracts related to roads (about £2.3 billion 
as opposed to £1.4 billion). The biggest departmental spender was the Department for 
Work and Pensions, who spent over £800 million on ICT. Mismanagement of ICT 
projects means that there is less to spend on good things such as hospitals.
Unfortunately, projects are not always successful. In a report published in 2003, the 
Standish Group in the United States analysed 13,522 projects and concluded that only 
a third of projects were successful; 82% of projects were late and 43% exceeded their 
budget.
The reason for these project shortcomings is often the management of projects. The 
National Audit Ofﬁ ce in the UK, for example, among other factors causing project 
failure identiﬁ ed ‘lack of skills and proven approach to project management and risk 
management’.
1.3 What is a Project?
The dictionary deﬁ nitions put a clear emphasis on the project being a planned
activity.
The emphasis on being planned assumes we can determine how to carry out a task 
before we start. Yet with exploratory projects this might be difﬁ cult. Planning is in 
essence thinking carefully about something before you do it – even with uncertain 
projects this is worth doing as long as the resulting plans are seen as provisional. Other 
activities, such as routine maintenance, will have been performed so many times that 
everyone knows exactly what to do. In these cases, planning hardly seems necessary, 
although procedures might be documented to ensure consistency and to help newcomers.
The activities that beneﬁ t most from conventional project management are likely to 
lie between these two extremes – see Figure 1.1.
There is a hazy boundary between the non-routine project and the routine job. The 
ﬁ rst time you do a routine task it will be like a project. On the other hand, a project to 
develop a system similar to previous ones that you have developed will have a large element of the routine.
FIGURE 1.1
Ac vi es most likely to beneﬁ t from project management
The information in this 
paragraph comes from 
a National Audit Ofﬁ ce 
report, Improving 
IT Procurement, 
November 2004.
There has been some 
debate about the 
precise validity of the 
Standish ﬁ ndings but 
the key point about 
the prevalence of IT 
project failings remains 
clear.
Dictionary deﬁ nitions 
of ‘project’ include: ‘A 
speciﬁ c plan or design’ 
‘A planned undertaking’ 
‘A large undertaking: 
e.g. a public works 
scheme’, Longman
Concise English 
Dictionary, 1982.
Programme manage-
ment is often used to 
coordinate activities on 
concurrent jobs.

Introduction to So ware Project Management
3
The following characteristics distinguish projects:
 
● non-routine tasks are involved;
 
● planning is required;
 
● speciﬁ c objectives are to be met or a speciﬁ ed product is to be created;
 
● the project has a predetermined time span;
 
● work is carried out for someone other than yourself;
 
● work involves several specialisms;
 
● people are formed into a temporary work group to carry out the task;
 
● work is carried out in several phases;
 
● the resources that are available for use on the project are constrained;
 
● the project is large or complex.
The more any of these factors apply to a task, the more difﬁ cult that task will be. Project size is particularly 
important. The project that employs 20 developers is likely to be disproportionately more difﬁ cult than one 
with only 10 staff because of the need for additional coordination. The examples and exercises used in 
this book usually relate to smaller projects in order to make the techniques easier to grasp. However, the 
techniques and issues discussed are of equal relevance to larger projects.
 
EXERCISE 
1.1
Consider the following:
 
● producing an edition of a newspaper;
 
● putting a robot vehicle on Mars to search for signs of life;
 
● getting married;
 
● amending a ﬁ nancial computer system to deal with a common European currency;
 
● a research project into what makes a good human–computer interface;
 
● an investigation into the reason why a user has a problem with a computer system;
 
● a second-year programming assignment for a computing student;
 
● writing an operating system for a new computer;
 
● installing a new version of a word processing package in an organization.
Some seem more like real projects than others. Put them into an order most closely matching your ideas 
of what constitutes a project. For each entry in the ordered list, describe the difference between it and 
the one above which makes it less worthy of the term ‘project’.
There is no one correct answer to this exercise, but a possible solution to this and the other exercises 
you will come across may be found at the end of the book.
Some argue that projects are especially problematic as they are temporary sub-orga-
nizations. A group of people is brought together to carry out a task. The existence of 
this sub-organization cuts across the authority of the existing units within the organi-
zation. This has the advantage that a group containing various specialists is focused 
on a single important task. However, the project is likely to be seen as disruptive to 
For example, see Rolf 
A. Lundin and Andres 
Söderholm (1995) 
‘A theory of the tem-
porary organization’ 
Scandinavian Journal 
of Management 11(4) 
437–55.

4
So ware Project Management
others. Also, expertise built up during the project may be lost when the team is eventually dispersed at the 
end of the project.
1.4 Soft ware Projects versus Other Types of Project
Many techniques in general project management also apply to software project 
management, but Fred Brooks identiﬁ ed some characteristics of software projects 
which make them particularly difﬁ cult:
Invisibility When a physical artefact such as a bridge is constructed the progress can 
actually be seen. With software, progress is not immediately visible. Software project 
management can be seen as the process of making the invisible visible.
Complexity Per dollar, pound or euro spent, software products contain more complexity 
than other engineered artefacts.
Conformity The ‘traditional’ engineer usually works with physical systems and materials like cement and 
steel. These physical systems have complexity, but are governed by consistent physical laws. Software devel-
opers have to conform to the requirements of human clients. It is not just that individuals can be inconsistent. 
Organizations, because of lapses in collective memory, in internal communication or in effective decision 
making, can exhibit remarkable ‘organizational stupidity’.
Flexibility That software is easy to change is seen as a strength. However, where the software system inter-
faces with a physical or organizational system, it is expected that the software will change to accommodate 
the other components rather than vice versa. Thus software systems are particularly subject to change.
1.5 Contract Management and Technical Project Management
In-house projects are where the users and the developers of new software work for the same organization. 
However, increasingly organizations contract out ICT development to outside developers. Here, the client 
organization will often appoint a ‘project manager’ to supervise the contract who will delegate many techni-
cally oriented decisions to the contractors. Thus, the project manager will not worry about estimating the 
effort needed to write individual software components as long as the overall project is within budget and on 
time. On the supplier side, there will need to be project managers who deal with the more technical issues. 
This book leans towards the concerns of these ‘technical’ project managers.
1.6 Activities Covered by Soft ware Project Management
A software project is not only concerned with the actual writing of software. In fact, 
where a software application is bought ‘off the shelf’, there may be no software 
writing as such, but this is still fundamentally a software project because so many of 
the other activities associated with software will still be present.
Usually there are three successive processes that bring a new system into being – see Figure 1.2.
 
1. The feasibility study assesses whether a project is worth starting – that it has a valid business case.
Information is gathered about the requirements of the proposed application. Requirements elicitation 
can, at least initially, be complex and difﬁ cult. The stakeholders may know the aims they wish to 
F. P. Brooks (1987). 
‘No silver bullet: es-
sence and accidents 
of software engineer-
ing’. This essay has 
been included in The
Mythical Man-Month,
Anniversary Edition, 
Addison Wesley, 1995.
Chapter 4 on project 
analysis and technical 
planning looks at some 
alternative life cycles.

Introduction to So ware Project Management
5
pursue, but not be sure about the means of achievement. The developmental and 
operational costs, and the value of the beneﬁ ts of the new system, will also have 
to be estimated. With a large system, the feasibility study could be a project in 
its own right with its own plan. The study could be part of a strategic planning 
exercise examining a range of potential software developments. Sometimes an organization assesses a 
programme of development made up of a number of projects.
 
2. Planning If the feasibility study indicates that the prospective project appears 
viable, then project planning can start. For larger projects, we would not do all 
our detailed planning at the beginning. We create an outline plan for the whole 
project and a detailed one for the ﬁ rst stage. Because we will have more detailed 
and accurate project information after the earlier stages of the project have been 
completed, planning of the later stages is left to nearer their start.
 
3. Project execution The project can now be executed. The execution of a project 
often contains design and implementation sub-phases. Students new to project 
planning often ﬁ nd that the boundary between design and planning can be hazy. Design is making 
decisions about the form of the products to be created. This could relate to the external appearance of 
the software, that is, the user interface, or the internal architecture. The plan details the activities to be 
carried out to create these products. Planning and design can be confused because at the most detailed 
level, planning decisions are inﬂ uenced by design decisions. Thus a software product with ﬁ ve major 
components is likely to require ﬁ ve sets of activities to create them.
Figure 1.3 shows the typical sequence of software development activities recom-
mended in the international standard ISO 12207. Some activities are concerned with 
the system while others relate to software. The development of software will be only 
one part of a project. Software could be developed, for example, for a project which 
also requires the installation of an ICT infrastructure, the design of user jobs and user 
training.
 
● Requirements analysis starts with requirements elicitation or requirements 
gathering which establishes what the potential users and their managers require 
of the new system. It could relate to a function – that the system should do 
something. It could be a quality requirement – how well the functions must work. An example of this is 
FIGURE 1.2
The feasibility study/plan/execu on cycle
Chapter 2 explores 
some further as-
pects of programme 
management.
The PRINCE2 method, 
which is described in 
Appendix A, takes this 
iterative approach to 
planning. Annex 1 to 
this chapter has an 
outline of the content 
of a plan.
Figure 1.3 suggests 
that these stages must 
be done strictly in se-
quence – we will see 
in Chapter 4 that other, 
iterative approaches 
can be adopted. 
However, the actual 
activities listed here 
would still be done.

6
So ware Project Management
dispatching an ambulance in response to an emergency telephone call. In this case transaction time would 
be affected by hardware and software performance as well as the speed of human operation. Training to 
ensure that operators use the computer system efﬁ ciently is an example of a system requirement for the 
project, as opposed to a speciﬁ cally software requirement. There would also be resource requirements 
that relate to application development costs.
 
● Architecture design The components of the new system that fulﬁ l each requirement have to be identiﬁ ed. 
Existing components may be able to satisfy some requirements. In other cases, a new component 
will have to be made. These components are not only software: they could be new hardware or work 
processes. Although software developers are primarily concerned with software components, it is very 
rare that these can be developed in isolation. They will, for example, have to take account of existing 
legacy systems with which they will interoperate. The design of the system architecture is thus an 
input to the software requirements. A second architecture design process then takes place that maps the 
software requirements to software components.
 
● Detailed design Each software component is made up of a number of software units that can be 
separately coded and tested. The detailed design of these units is carried out separately.
FIGURE 1.3
The ISO 12207 so ware development life cycle

Introduction to So ware Project Management
7
 
● Code and test refers to writing code for each software unit. Initial testing to debug individual software 
units would be carried out at this stage.
 
● Integration The components are tested together to see if they meet the overall requirements. Integration 
could involve combining different software components, or combining and testing the software element 
of the system in conjunction with the hardware platforms and user interactions.
 
● Qualiﬁ cation testing The system, including the software components, has to be tested carefully to 
ensure that all the requirements have been fulﬁ lled.
 
● Installation This is the process of making the new system operational. It would include activities such 
as setting up standing data (for example, the details for employees in a payroll system), setting system 
parameters, installing the software onto the hardware platforms and user training.
 
● Acceptance support This is the resolving of problems with the newly installed system, including the 
correction of any errors, and implementing agreed extensions and improvements. Software maintenance 
can be seen as a series of minor software projects. In many environments, most software development 
is in fact maintenance.
 
EXERCISE 
1.2
Brightmouth College is a higher education institution which used to be managed by a local government 
authority but has now become autonomous. Its payroll is still administered by the local authority and 
pay slips and other output are produced in the local authority’s computer centre. The authority now 
charges the college for this service. The college management are of the opinion that it would be cheaper 
to obtain an ‘off-the shelf’ payroll package and do the payroll processing themselves.
What would be the main stages of the project to convert to independent payroll processing by the 
college? Bearing in mind that an off-the-shelf package is to be used, how would this project differ from 
one where the software was to be written from scratch?
 
EXERCISE 
1.3
Assume that a software organization development has been asked to carry out a feasibility study to 
develop the payroll package for Brightmouth College. The development organization plans to develop 
the software by customizing one of its existing products. What are the main steps through which the 
project manager of the organization would carry out the feasibility study?
1.7 Plans, Methods and Methodologies
A plan for an activity must be based on some idea of a method of work. For example, if you were asked to 
test some software, you may know nothing about the software to be tested, but you could assume that you 
would need to:
 
● analyse the requirements for the software;
 
● devise and write test cases that will check that each requirement has been satisﬁ ed;

8
So ware Project Management
 
● create test scripts and expected results for each test case;
 
● compare the actual results and the expected results and identify discrepancies.
While a method relates to a type of activity in general, a plan takes that method (and perhaps others) and 
converts it to real activities, identifying for each activity:
 
● its start and end dates;
 
● who will carry it out;
 
● what tools and materials – including information – will be needed.
The output from one method might be the input to another. Groups of methods or techniques are often 
grouped into methodologies such as object-oriented design.
 
EXERCISE 
1.4
This should ideally be done in groups of about four, but you can think about how you would go about 
this exercise on your own if needs be. You are probably in a building that has more than one storey. 
From the point of view of this exercise, the bigger the building the better.
In a group of four, work out how you would obtain an accurate estimate of the height of the building. 
(If you happen to be in a single-storey building, you can estimate the ﬂ oor area instead!) Plan how 
you would carry out any actions needed to obtain your estimate. Spend 20 minutes on this – you must 
remain in the same room for this planning phase. Once planning is complete, implement your plan, 
timing how long it takes to produce your ﬁ nal ﬁ gure.
If there is more than one group carrying out this exercise, after completion of the task you can compare 
answers and also the approach you used when coming up with your answer.
1.8 Some Ways of Categorizing Soft ware Projects
Projects may differ because of the different technical products to be created. Thus we need to identify the 
characteristics of a project which could affect the way in which it should be planned and managed. Other 
factors are discussed below.
Compulsory versus voluntary users
In workplaces there are systems that staff have to use if they want to do something, such as recording a sale. 
However, use of a system is increasingly voluntary, as in the case of computer games. Here it is difﬁ cult to 
elicit precise requirements from potential users as we could with a business system. What the game will do 
will thus depend much on the informed ingenuity of the developers, along with techniques such as market 
surveys, focus groups and prototype evaluation.
Information systems versus embedded systems
A traditional distinction has been between information systems which enable staff to 
carry out ofﬁ ce processes and embedded systems which control machines. A stock 
control system would be an information system. An embedded, or process control, 
system might control the air conditioning equipment in a building. Some systems may 
have elements of both where, for example, the stock control system also controls an automated warehouse.
Embedded systems 
are also called real-
time or industrial 
systems.

Introduction to So ware Project Management
9
 
EXERCISE 
1.5
Would an operating system on a computer be an information system or an embedded system?
Outsourced projects
While developing a large project, sometimes, it makes good commercial sense for a company to outsource 
some parts of its work to other companies. There can be several reasons behind such a decision. For example, 
a company may consider outsourcing as a good option, if it feels that it does not have sufﬁ cient expertise to 
develop some speciﬁ c parts of the product or if it determines that some parts can be developed cost-effec-
tively by another company. Since an outsourced project is a small part of some project, it is usually small in 
size and needs to be completed within a few months. Considering these differences between an outsourced 
project and a conventional project, managing an outsourced project entails special challenges.
Indian software companies excel in executing outsourced software projects and have earned a ﬁ ne reputation 
in this ﬁ eld all over the world. Of late, the Indian companies have slowly begun to focus on product devel-
opment as well.
The type of development work being handled by a company can have an impact on its proﬁ tability. For 
example, a company that has developed a generic software product usually gets an uninterrupted stream of 
revenue over several years. However, outsourced projects fetch only one time revenue to any company.
Objective-driven development
Projects may be distinguished by whether their aim is to produce a product or to meet 
certain objectives.
A project might be to create a product, the details of which have been speciﬁ ed by the 
client. The client has the responsibility for justifying the product.
On the other hand, the project requirement might be to meet certain objectives which 
could be met in a number of ways. An organization might have a problem and ask a 
specialist to recommend a solution.
Many software projects have two stages. First is an objective-driven project resulting in recommendations. 
This might identify the need for a new software system. The next stage is a project actually to create the 
software product.
This is useful where the technical work is being done by an external group and the user needs are unclear at 
the outset. The external group can produce a preliminary design at a ﬁ xed fee. If the design is acceptable the 
developers can then quote a price for the second, implementation, stage based on an agreed requirement.
 
EXERCISE 
1.6
Would the project, to implement an independent payroll system at the Brightmouth College described 
in Exercise 1.2, above, be an objective-driven project or a product-driven project?
Service level agree-
ments are becoming 
increasingly important 
as organizations 
contract out functions 
to external service 
suppliers.

10
So ware Project Management
1.9 Stakeholders
These are people who have a stake or interest in the project. Their early identiﬁ cation is important as you need 
to set up adequate communication channels with them. Stakeholders can be categorized as:
 
● Internal to the project team This means that they will be under the direct managerial control of the 
project leader.
 
● External to the project team but within the same organization For example, the project leader might need 
the assistance of the users to carry out systems testing. Here the commitment of the people involved has 
to be negotiated.
 
● External to both the project team and the organization External stakeholders may be customers (or 
users) who will beneﬁ t from the system that the project implements. They may be contractors who will 
carry out work for the project. The relationship here is usually based on a contract.
Different types of stakeholder may have different objectives and one of the jobs of 
the project leader is to recognize these different interests and to be able to reconcile 
them. For example, end-users may be concerned with the ease of use of the new 
application, while their managers may be more focused on staff savings. The project 
leader therefore needs to be a good communicator and negotiator. Boehm and Ross 
proposed a ‘Theory W’ of software project management where the manager concen-
trates on creating situations where all parties beneﬁ t from a project and therefore have 
an interest in its success. (The ‘W’ stands for ‘win–win’.)
Project managers can sometimes miss an important stakeholder group, especially 
in unfamiliar business contexts. These could be departments supplying important 
services that are taken for granted.
Given the importance of coordinating the efforts of stakeholders, the recommended 
practice is for a communication plan to be created at the start of a project.
 
EXERCISE 
1.7
Identify the stakeholders in the Brightmouth College payroll project.
1.10 Setting Objectives
Among all these stakeholders are those who actually own the project. They control the ﬁ nancing of the 
project. They also set the objectives of the project. The objectives should deﬁ ne what the project team must 
achieve for project success. Although different stakeholders have different motivations, the project objectives 
identify the shared intentions for the project.
Objectives focus on the desired outcomes of the project rather than the tasks within it – they are the ‘post-con-
ditions’ of the project. Informally the objectives could be written as a set of statements following the opening 
words ‘the project will be a success if. . . .’ Thus one statement in a set of objectives might be ‘customers can 
order our products online’ rather than ‘to build an e-commerce website’. There is often more than one way to 
meet an objective and the more possible routes to success the better.
B.W. Boehm and R. 
Ross, ‘Theory W soft-
ware project manage-
ment: principles and 
examples’, in B. W. 
Boehm (ed.) (1989) 
Software Risk Manage-
ment, IEEE Computer 
Society Press.
The role and format 
of communication 
plans will be explained 
in greater detail in 
Chapter 11 on manag-
ing people in software 
environments.

Introduction to So ware Project Management
11
There may be several stakeholders, including users in different business areas, who might have some claim to 
project ownership. In such a case, a project authority needs to be explicitly identiﬁ ed with overall authority 
over the project.
This authority is often a project steering committee (or project board or project 
management board) with overall responsibility for setting, monitoring and modifying 
objectives. The project manager runs the project on a day-to-day basis, but regularly 
reports to the steering committee.
Sub-objectives and goals
An effective objective for an individual must be something that is within the control 
of that individual. An objective might be that the software application produced must 
pay for itself by reducing staff costs. As an overall business objective this might be 
reasonable. For software developers it would be unreasonable as any reduction in 
operational staff costs depends not just on them but on the operational management 
of the delivered system. A more appropriate goal or sub-objective for the software 
developers would be to keep development costs within a certain budget.
We can say that in order to achieve the objective we must achieve certain goals or sub-objectives ﬁ rst. These 
are steps on the way to achieving an objective, just as goals scored in a football match are steps towards the 
objective of winning the match. Informally this can be expressed as a set of statements following the words 
‘To reach objective. . ., the following must be in place. . .’.
The mnemonic SMART is sometimes used to describe well-deﬁ ned objectives:
 
● Speciﬁ c Effective objectives are concrete and well deﬁ ned. Vague aspirations 
such as ‘to improve customer relations’ are unsatisfactory. Objectives should be 
deﬁ ned so that it is obvious to all whether the project has been successful.
 
● Measurable Ideally there should be measures of effectiveness which tell us how 
successful the project has been. For example, ‘to reduce customer complaints’
would be more satisfactory as an objective than ‘to improve customer relations’.
The measure can, in some cases, be an answer to simple yes/no question, e.g. 
‘Did we install the new software by 1 June?’
 
● Achievable It must be within the power of the individual or group to achieve the objective.
 
● Relevant The objective must be relevant to the true purpose of the project.
 
● Time constrained There should be a deﬁ ned point in time by which the objective should have been 
achieved.
 
EXERCISE 
1.8
Bearing in mind the above discussion of objectives, comment on the appropriateness of the wording of 
each of the following ‘objectives’ for software developers:
 
(i) to implement the new application on time and within budget;
 
(ii) to implement the new software application with the fewest possible software errors that might lead 
to operational failures;
This committee is likely 
to contain user, devel-
opment and manage-
ment representatives.
Deﬁ ning sub-objectives 
requires assumptions 
about how the main 
objective is to be 
achieved.
This still leaves a prob-
lem about the level at 
which the target should 
be set, e.g. why, say, a 
50% reduction in com-
plaints and not 40% or 
60%?

12
So ware Project Management
 (iii) to design a system that is user-friendly;
 (iv) to produce full documentation for the new system.
Measures of eff ectiveness
Measures of effectiveness provide practical methods of checking that an objective 
has been met. ‘Mean time between failures’ (mtbf) might, for example, be used to 
measure reliability. This is a performance measurement and, as such, can only be 
taken once the system is operational. Project managers want to get some idea of the 
performance of the completed system as it is being constructed. They will therefore 
seek predictive measures. For example, a large number of errors found during code inspections might indicate 
potential problems with reliability later.
 
EXERCISE 
1.9
Identify the objectives and sub-objectives of the Brightmouth College payroll project. What measures 
of effectiveness could be used to check the success in achieving the objectives of the project?
1.11 Th e Business Case
Most projects need to have a justiﬁ cation or business case: the effort and expense of 
pushing the project through must be seen to be worthwhile in terms of the beneﬁ ts 
that will eventually be felt. A cost–beneﬁ t analysis will often be part of the project’s 
feasibility study. This will itemize and quantify the project’s costs and beneﬁ ts. The 
beneﬁ ts will be affected by the completion date: the sooner the project is completed, 
the sooner the beneﬁ ts can be experienced. The quantiﬁ cation of beneﬁ ts will often 
require the formulation of a business model which explains how the new application 
can generate the claimed beneﬁ ts.
A simple example of a business model is that a new web-based application might allow customers from all 
over the world to order a ﬁ rm’s products via the internet, increasing sales and thus increasing revenue and 
proﬁ ts.
Any project plan must ensure that the business case is kept intact. For example:
 
● that development costs are not allowed to rise to a level which threatens to exceed the value of 
beneﬁ ts;
 
● that the features of the system are not reduced to a level where the expected beneﬁ ts cannot be 
realized;
 
● that the delivery date is not delayed so that there is an unacceptable loss of beneﬁ ts.
1.12 Project Success and Failure
The project plan should be designed to ensure project success by preserving the business case for the project. 
However, every non-trivial project will have problems, and at what stage do we say that a project is actually 
a failure? Because different stakeholders have different interests, some stakeholders in a project might see it 
as a success while others do not.
These concepts are 
explained more fully 
in Chapter 13 on soft-
ware quality.
The business case 
should be established 
at the time of the proj-
ect’s feasibility study. 
Chapter 2 explains 
the idea of a business 
case in more detail.

Introduction to So ware Project Management
13
Broadly speaking, we can distinguish between project objectives and business objec-
tives. The project objectives are the targets that the project team is expected to achieve. 
In the case of software projects, they can usually be summarized as delivering:
 
● the agreed functionality
 
● to the required level of quality
 
● on time
 
● within budget.
A project could meet these targets but the application, once delivered could fail to meet the business case. A 
computer game could be delivered on time and within budget, but might then not sell. A commercial website 
used for online sales could be created successfully, but customers might not use it to buy products, because 
they could buy the goods more cheaply elsewhere.
We have seen that in business terms it can generally be said that a project is a success if 
the value of beneﬁ ts exceeds the costs. We have also seen that while project managers 
have considerable control over development costs, the value of the beneﬁ ts of the 
project deliverables is dependent on external factors such as the number of customers. 
Project objectives still have some bearing on eventual business success. As we will 
see in Chapter 2, increasing development costs reduce the chances of the delivered 
product being proﬁ table. A delay in completion reduces the amount of time during which beneﬁ ts can be 
generated and diminishes the value of the project.
A project can be a success on delivery but then be a business failure, On the other hand, a project could be 
late and over budget, but its deliverables could still, over time, generate beneﬁ ts that outweigh the initial 
expenditure.
Some argue that the possible gap between project and business concerns can be reduced by having a broader 
view of projects that includes business issues. For example, the project management of an e-commerce 
website implementation could plan activities such as market surveys, competitor analysis, focus groups, 
prototyping, and evaluation by typical potential users – all designed to reduce business risks.
Because the focus of project management is, not unnaturally, on the immediate project, 
it may not be seen that the project is actually one of a sequence. Later projects beneﬁ t 
from the technical skills learnt on earlier projects. Technical learning will increase 
costs on the earlier projects, but later projects beneﬁ t as the learnt technologies can 
be deployed more quickly, cheaply and accurately. This expertise is often accom-
panied by additional software assets, for example reusable code. Where software 
development is outsourced, there may be immediate savings, but these longer-term 
beneﬁ ts of increased expertise will be lost. Astute managers may assess which areas 
of technical expertise it would be beneﬁ cial to develop.
Customer relationships can also be built up over a number of projects. If a client has trust in a supplier who 
has done satisfactory work in the past, they are more likely to use that company again, particularly if the new 
requirement builds on functionality already delivered. It is much more expensive to acquire new clients than 
it is to retain existing ones.
A good introduction to 
the issues discussed 
here can be found in 
A. J. Shenhar and O. 
Levy (1997) ‘Mapping 
the dimensions of proj-
ect success’ Project
Management Journal 
28(2) 9–12.
The assessment of 
the value of project 
beneﬁ ts is explored 
in greater depth in 
Chapter 2.
For a wider discussion 
of the relationships be-
tween successive proj-
ects, see M. Engwall 
(2003) ‘No project is an 
island: linking projects 
to history and context’ 
Research Policy 32 
789–808.

14
So ware Project Management
1.13 What is Management?
We have explored some of the special characteristics of software. We now look at the ‘management’ aspect of 
software project management. It has been suggested that management involves the following activities:
 
● planning – deciding what is to be done;
 
● organizing – making arrangements;
 
● stafﬁ ng – selecting the right people for the job etc.;
 
● directing – giving instructions;
 
● monitoring – checking on progress;
 
● controlling – taking action to remedy hold-ups;
 
● innovating – coming up with new solutions;
 
● representing – liaising with clients, users, developer, suppliers and other stakeholders.
 
EXERCISE 
1.10
Paul Duggan is the manager of a software development section. On Tuesday at 10.00 a.m. he and his 
fellow section heads have a meeting with their group manager about the stafﬁ ng requirements for 
the coming year. Paul has already drafted a document ‘bidding’ for staff. This is based on the work 
planned for his section for the next year. The document is discussed at the meeting. At 2.00 p.m. Paul 
has a meeting with his senior staff about an important project his section is undertaking. One of the 
programming staff has just had a road accident and will be in hospital for some time. It is decided that 
the project can be kept on schedule by transferring another team member from less urgent work to this 
project. A temporary replacement is to be brought in to do the less urgent work but this may take a week 
or so to arrange. Paul has to phone both the human resources manager about getting a replacement and 
the user for whom the less urgent work is being done, explaining why it is likely to be delayed.
Identify which of the eight management responsibilities listed above Paul was responding to at different 
points during his day.
Much of the project manager’s time is spent on only three of the eight identiﬁ ed activities, viz., project 
planning, monitoring, and control. The time period during which these activities are carried out is indicated 
in Fig. 1.4. It shows that project management is carried out over three well-deﬁ ned stages or processes, 
irrespective of the methodology used. In the project initiation stage, an initial plan is made. As the project 
starts, the project is monitored and controlled to proceed as planned. However, the initial plan is revised 
periodically to accommodate additional details and constraints about the project as they become available. 
Finally, the project is closed. In the project closing stage, all activities are logically completed and all contracts 
are formally closed.
Initial project planning is undertaken immediately after the feasibility study phase and before starting the 
requirements analysis and speciﬁ cation process. Figure 1.4 shows this project initiation period. Initial project 
planning involves estimating several characteristics of a project. Based on these estimates, all subsequent 
project activities are planned. The initial project plans are revised periodically as the project progresses and 
more project data becomes available. Once the project execution starts, monitoring and control activities are 
taken up to ensure that the project execution proceeds as planned. The monitoring activity involves monitoring 
the progress of the project. Control activities are initiated to minimize any signiﬁ cant variation in the plan.

Introduction to So ware Project Management
15
Project planning is an important responsibility of the project manager.  During project planning, the project 
manager needs to perform a few well-deﬁ ned activities that have been outlined below. Note that we have 
given a very brief description of these activities in this chapter. We will discuss these activities in more detail 
in subsequent chapters. Several best practices have been proposed for software project planning activities. 
In Chapter 3 we will discuss Step Wise, which is based on the popular PRINCE2 (PRojects IN Controlled 
Environments) method. While PRINCE2 is used extensively in the UK and Europe, similar software project 
management best practices have been put forward in the USA by the Project Management Institute’s ‘PMBOK’ 
which refers to their publication ‘A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge.’
 
● Estimation The following project attributes are estimated.
 
● Cost How much is it going to cost to complete the project?
 
● Duration How long is it going to take to complete the project?
 
● Effort How much effort would be necessary for completing the project?
The effectiveness of all activities such as scheduling and stafﬁ ng, which are planned at a later stage, depends 
on the accuracy with which the above three project parameters have been estimated.
 
● Scheduling Based on estimations of effort and duration, the schedules for manpower and other resources 
are developed.
 
● Stafﬁ ng Staff organization and stafﬁ ng plans are made.
 
● Risk Management This activity includes risk identiﬁ cation, analysis, and abatement planning.
 
● Miscellaneous Plans This includes making several other plans such as quality assurance plan, conﬁ gu-
ration management plan, etc.
Project monitoring and control activities are undertaken after the initiation of development activities. The 
aim of project monitoring and control activities is to ensure that the software development proceeds as 
planned. While carrying out project monitoring and control activities, a project manager may sometimes 
ﬁ nd it necessary to change the plan to cope with speciﬁ c situations and make the plan more accurate as more 
project data becomes available.
At the start of a project, the project manager does not have complete knowledge about the details of the 
project. As the project progresses through different development phases, the manager’s information base 
gradually improves. The complexities of different project activities become clear, some of the anticipated 
risks get resolved, and new risks appear. The project parameters are re-estimated periodically incorporating 
new understanding and change in project parameters. By taking these developments into account, the project 
manager can plan subsequent activities more accurately with increasing levels of conﬁ dence.  Figure 1.4 
shows this aspect as iterations between monitoring and control, and the plan revision activities.
FIGURE 1.4
Principal project management processes

16
So ware Project Management
1.14 Management Control
Management, in general, involves setting objectives for a system and then monitoring the performance of 
the system. In Figure 1.5 the ‘real world’ is shown as being rather formless. Especially in the case of large 
undertakings, there will be a lot going on about which management should be aware.
 
EXERCISE 
1.11
An ICT project is to replace locally held paper-based records with a centrally organized database. Staff 
in a large number of ofﬁ ces that are geographically dispersed need training and will then have to use 
the new ICT system to set up the backlog of manual records on the new database. The system cannot be 
properly operational until the last record has been transferred. The new system will only be successful 
if new transactions can be processed within certain time cycles.
Identify the data that you would collect to ensure that during execution of the project things were going 
to plan.
This will involve the local managers in data collection. Bare details, such as ‘location X has processed 2000 
documents’, will not be very useful to higher management: data processing will be needed to transform this 
raw data into useful information. This might be in such forms as ‘percentage of records processed’, ‘average 
documents processed per day per person’ and ‘estimated completion date’.
FIGURE 1.5
The project control cycle

Introduction to So ware Project Management
17
In our example, the project management might examine the ‘estimated completion date’ for completing 
data transfer for each branch. These can be checked against the overall target date for completion of this 
phase of the project. In effect they are comparing actual performance with one aspect of the overall project 
objectives. They might ﬁ nd that one or two branches will fail to complete the transfer of details in time. 
They would then need to consider what to do (this is represented in Figure 1.5 by the box Making decisions/
plans). One possibility would be to move staff temporarily from one branch to another. If this is done, there 
is always the danger that while the completion date for the one branch is pulled back to before the overall 
target date, the date for the branch from which staff are being moved is pushed forward beyond that date. The 
project manager would need to calculate carefully what the impact would be in moving staff from particular 
branches. This is modelling the consequences of a potential solution. Several different proposals could be 
modelled in this way before one was chosen for implementation.
Having implemented the decision, the situation needs to be kept under review by collecting and processing 
further progress details. For instance, the next time that progress is reported, a branch to which staff have been 
transferred could still be behind in transferring details. This might be because the reason why the branch has 
got behind in transferring details is because the manual records are incomplete and another department, for 
whom the project has a low priority, has to be involved in providing the missing information. In this case, 
transferring extra staff to do data inputting will not have accelerated data transfer.
It can be seen that a project plan is dynamic and will need constant adjustment during the execution of the 
project. Courses and books on project management (such as this one) often focus considerable attention 
on project planning. While this is to be expected, with nearly all projects much more time is spent actually 
doing the project rather than planning it. A good plan provides a foundation for a good project, but is nothing 
without intelligent execution. The original plan will not be set in stone but will be modiﬁ ed to take account 
of changing circumstances.
1.15 Traditional versus Modern Project Management Practices
Over the last two decades, the basic approach taken by the software industry to develop software has undergone 
a radical change. Hardly any software is being developed from scratch any more. Software development 
projects are increasingly being based on either tailoring some existing product or reusing certain pre-built 
libraries. In either case, two important goals of recent life cycle models are maximization of code reuse and 
compression of project durations. Other goals include facilitating and accommodating client feedbacks and 
customer participation in project development work, and incremental delivery of the product with evolving 
functionalities. Change requests from customers are encouraged, rather than circumvented.  Clients on the 
other hand, are demanding further reductions in product delivery times and costs. These recent developments 
have changed project management practices in many signiﬁ cant ways. In the following section, we will discuss 
some important differences between modern project management practices and traditional practices.
 
● Planning Incremental Delivery Few decades ago, projects were much simpler and therefore more 
predictable than the present day projects. In those days, projects were planned with sufﬁ cient detail, 
much before the actual project execution started. After the project initiation, monitoring and control 
activities were carried out to ensure that the project execution proceeded as per plan. Now, projects 
are required to be completed over a much shorter duration, and rapid application development and 
deployment are considered key strategies. The traditional long-term planning has given way to adaptive 
short-term planning. Instead of making a long-term project completion plan, the project manager now 
plans all incremental deliveries with evolving functionalities. This type of project management is 

18
So ware Project Management
often called extreme project management. Extreme project management is a highly ﬂ exible approach 
to project management that concentrates on the human side of project management (e.g., managing 
project stakeholders), rather than formal and complex planning and monitoring techniques.
 
● Quality Management Of late, customer awareness about product quality has increased signiﬁ cantly. 
Tasks associated with quality management have become an important responsibility of the project 
manager. The key responsibilities of a project manager now include assessment of project progress and 
tracking the quality of all intermediate artifacts. We will discuss quality management issues in Chapter 
13.
 
● Change Management Earlier, when the requirements were signed off by the customer, any changes 
to the requirements were rarely entertained. Customer suggestions are now actively being solicited 
and incorporated throughout the development process. To facilitate customer feedback, incremental 
delivery models are popularly being used.  Product development is being carried out through a series of 
product versions implementing increasingly greater functionalities. Also customer feedback is solicited 
on each version for incorporation. This has made it necessary for an organization to keep track of the 
various versions and revisions through which the product develops. Another reason for the increased 
importance of keeping track of the versions and revisions is the following. Application development 
through customization has become a popular business model. Therefore, existence of a large number of 
versions of a product and the need to support these by a development organization has become common. 
In this context, the project manager plays a key role in product base lining and version control. This has 
made change management a crucial responsibility of the project manager. Change management is also 
known as conﬁ guration management. We will discuss change management in Chapter 9.
 
EXERCISE 
1.12
Assume that the development of the pay roll package of Brightmouth College has been entrusted to an 
organization who would develop it by customizing one of its products. Discuss the main stages through 
which the organization could carry out project development?
CONCLUSION
This chapter has laid a foundation for the remainder of the book by deﬁ ning what is meant by various terms 
such as ‘software project’ and ‘management’. Among some of the more important points that have been made 
are the following:
 
● Projects are by deﬁ nition non-routine and therefore more uncertain than normal undertakings.
 
● Software projects are similar to other projects but have some attributes that present particular difﬁ -
culties, e.g. the relative invisibility of many of their products.
 
● A key factor in project success is having clear objectives. Different stakeholders in a project, however, are 
likely to have different objectives. This points to the need for a recognized overall project authority.
 
● For objectives to be effective there must be practical ways of testing that the objectives have been 
met.
 
● Where projects involve many different people, effective channels of information have to be established. 
Having objective measures of success helps unambiguous communication between the various parties 
to a project.

Scanned by CamScanner
https://abdullahsurati.github.io/bscit
https://abdullahsurati.github.io/bscit

Scanned by CamScanner
https://abdullahsurati.github.io/bscit
https://abdullahsurati.github.io/bscit

Scanned by CamScanner
https://abdullahsurati.github.io/bscit
https://abdullahsurati.github.io/bscit

Scanned by CamScanner
https://abdullahsurati.github.io/bscit
https://abdullahsurati.github.io/bscit

Scanned by CamScanner
https://abdullahsurati.github.io/bscit
https://abdullahsurati.github.io/bscit

Scanned by CamScanner
https://abdullahsurati.github.io/bscit
https://abdullahsurati.github.io/bscit

Scanned by CamScanner
https://abdullahsurati.github.io/bscit
https://abdullahsurati.github.io/bscit

Scanned by CamScanner
https://abdullahsurati.github.io/bscit
https://abdullahsurati.github.io/bscit

Scanned by CamScanner
https://abdullahsurati.github.io/bscit
https://abdullahsurati.github.io/bscit

Scanned by CamScanner
https://abdullahsurati.github.io/bscit
https://abdullahsurati.github.io/bscit

Scanned by CamScanner
https://abdullahsurati.github.io/bscit
https://abdullahsurati.github.io/bscit

Scanned by CamScanner
https://abdullahsurati.github.io/bscit
https://abdullahsurati.github.io/bscit
