13
OBJECTIVES
When you have completed this chapter you will be able to:
explain the importance of software quality to software users and developers;
•
deﬁ ne the qualities of good software;
•
design methods of measuring the required qualities of software;
•
monitor the quality of the processes in a software project;
•
use external quality standards to ensure the quality of software acquired from an outside supplier;
•
develop systems using procedures that will increase their quality.
•
13.1 Introduction
While quality is generally agreed to be ‘a good thing’, in practice what is meant by the ‘quality’ of a system 
can be vague. We need to deﬁ ne precisely what qualities we require of a system. However, we need to go 
further – we need to judge objectively whether a system meets our quality requirements and this needs 
measurement. This would be of particular concern to someone like Brigette at Brightmouth College in the 
process of selecting a package.
For someone – like Amanda at IOE – who is developing software, waiting until the system exists before 
measuring it would be leaving things rather late. Amanda might want to assess the likely quality of the ﬁ nal 
system while it was still under development, and also to make sure that the development methods used would 
produce that quality. This leads to a different emphasis – rather than concentrating on the quality of the ﬁ nal 
system, a potential customer for software might check that the suppliers were using the best development 
methods.
This chapter examines these issues.
MODULE 5

So ware Quality
289
13.2 Th e Place of Soft ware Quality in Project Planning
Quality will be of concern at all stages of project planning and execution, but will be of particular interest at 
the following points in the Step Wise framework (Figure 13.1).
 
● Step 1: Identify project scope and objectives Some objectives could relate to the qualities of the appli-
cation to be delivered.
 
● Step 2: Identify project infrastructure Within this step, activity 2.2 identiﬁ es installation standards and 
procedures. Some of these will almost certainly be about quality.
 
● Step 3: Analyse project characteristics In activity 3.2 (‘Analyse other project characteristics – including 
quality based ones’) the application to be implemented is examined to see if it has any special quality 
requirements. If, for example, it is safety critical then a range of activities could be added, such as 
n-version development where a number of teams develop versions of the same software which are then 
run in parallel with the outputs being cross-checked for discrepancies.
FIGURE 13.1
The place of so ware quality in Step Wise

290
So ware Project Management
 
● Step 4: Identify the products and activities of the project It is at this point that the entry, exit and process 
requirements are identiﬁ ed for each activity. This is described later in this chapter.
 
● Step 8: Review and publicize plan At this stage the overall quality aspects of the project plan are 
reviewed.
13.3 Th e Importance of Soft ware Quality
We would expect quality to be a concern of all producers of goods and services. However, the special charac-
teristics of software create special demands.
 
● Increasing criticality of software The ﬁ nal customer or user is naturally anxious about the general 
quality of software, especially its reliability. This is increasingly so as organizations rely more on their 
computer systems and software is used in more safety-critical applications, for example to control 
aircraft.
 
● The intangibility of software can make it difﬁ cult to know that a project task was completed satisfac-
torily. Task outcomes can be made tangible by demanding that the developer produce ‘deliverables’ that 
can be examined for quality.
 
● Accumulating errors during software development As computer system development comprises steps 
where the output from one step is the input to the next, the errors in the later deliverables will be added 
to those in the earlier steps, leading to an accumulating detrimental effect. In general, the later in a 
project that an error is found the more expensive it will be to ﬁ x. In addition, because the number of 
errors in the system is unknown, the debugging phases of a project are particularly difﬁ cult to control.
For these reasons quality management is an essential part of effective overall project management.
13.4 Defi ning Soft ware Quality
In Chapter 1 we noted that a system has functional, quality and resource requirements. Functional require-
ments deﬁ ne what the system is to do, the resource requirements specify allowable costs and the quality 
requirements state how well this system is to operate.
 
EXERCISE 
13.1
At Brightmouth College, Brigette has to select the best off-the-shelf payroll package for the college. 
How should she go about this in a methodical manner?
One element of the approach could be the identiﬁ cation of criteria against which payroll packages are 
to be judged. What might these criteria be? How could you check the extent to which packages match 
these criteria?
Some qualities of a software product reﬂ ect the external view of software held by users, as in the case of 
usability. These external qualities have to be mapped to internal factors of which the developers would 
be aware. It could be argued, for example, that well-structured code is likely to have fewer errors and thus 
improve reliability.

So ware Quality
291
Deﬁ ning quality is not enough. If we are to judge whether a system meets our requirements we need to be 
able to measure its qualities.
A good measure must relate the number of units to the maximum possible. The 
maximum number of faults in a program, for example, is related to the size of the 
program, so a measure of faults per thousand lines of code is more helpful than total
faults in a program.
Trying to ﬁ nd measures for a particular quality helps to clarify and communicate what 
that quality really is. What is being asked is, in effect, ‘how do we know when we 
have been successful?’
The measures may be direct, where we can measure the quality directly, or indirect, where the thing being 
measured is not the quality itself but an indicator that the quality is present. For example, the number of 
enquiries by users received by a help desk about how one operates a particular software application might be 
an indirect measurement of its usability.
When project managers identify quality measurements they effectively set targets for project team members, 
so care has to be taken that an improvement in the measured quality is always meaningful. For example, the 
number of errors found in program inspections could be counted, on the grounds that the more thorough the 
inspection process, the more errors will be discovered. This count could, of course, be improved by allowing 
more errors to go through to the inspection stage rather than eradicating them earlier – which is not quite the 
point.
When there is concern about the need for a speciﬁ c quality characteristic in a software product then a quality 
speciﬁ cation with the following minimum details should be drafted:
 
● deﬁ nition/description: deﬁ nition of the quality characteristic;
 
● scale: the unit of measurement;
 
● test: the practical test of the extent to which the attribute quality exists;
 
● minimally acceptable: the worst value which might be acceptable if other characteristics compensated 
for it, and below which the product would have to be rejected out of hand;
 
● target range: the range of values within which it is planned the quality measurement value should lie;
 
● now: the value that applies currently.
 
EXERCISE 
13.2
Suggest quality speciﬁ cations for a word processing package. Give particular attention to the way that 
practical tests of these attributes could be conducted.
There could be several measurements applicable to a quality characteristic. For example, in the case of 
reliability, this might be measured in terms of:
 
● availability: the percentage of a particular time interval that a system is usable;
 
● mean time between failures: the total service time divided by the number of failures;
 
● failure on demand: the probability that a system will not be available at the time required or the proba-
bility that a transaction will fail;
 
● support activity: the number of fault reports that are generated and processed.
The BS ISO/IEC 
15939:2007 standard 
Systems and software 
engineering – mea-
surement process has
codiﬁ ed many of the 
practices discussed in 
this section.

292
So ware Project Management
 
EXERCISE 
13.3
The enhanced IOE maintenance jobs system has been installed, and is normally available to users from 
8.00 a.m. until 6.00 p.m. from Monday to Friday. Over a four-week period the system was unavailable 
for one whole day because of problems with a disk drive and was not available on two other days until 
10.00 in the morning because of problems with overnight batch processing runs.
What were the availability and the mean time between failures of the service?
Associated with reliability is maintainability, which is how quickly a fault, once 
detected, can be corrected. A key component of this is changeability, which is the 
ease with which the software can be modiﬁ ed. However, before an amendment can be 
made, the fault has to be diagnosed. Maintainability can therefore be seen as change-
ability plus a new quality, analysability, which is the ease with which causes of failure 
can be identiﬁ ed.
13.5 ISO 9126
Over the years, various lists of software quality characteristics have been put forward, 
such as those of James McCall and of Barry Boehm. A difﬁ culty has been the lack 
of agreed deﬁ nitions of the qualities of good software. The term ‘maintainability’ 
has been used, for example, to refer to the ease with which an error can be located 
and corrected in a piece of software, and also in a wider sense to include the ease 
of making any changes. For some, ‘robustness’ has meant the software’s tolerance 
of incorrect input, while for others it has meant the ability to change program code 
without introducing errors. The ISO 9126 standard was ﬁ rst introduced in 1991 to 
tackle the question of the deﬁ nition of software quality. The original 13-page document 
was designed as a foundation upon which further, more detailed, standards could be 
built. The ISO 9126 standards documents are now very lengthy. Partly this is because 
people with differing motivations might be interested in software quality, namely:
 
● acquirers who are obtaining software from external suppliers;
 
● developers who are building a software product;
 
● independent evaluators who are assessing the quality of a software product, not for themselves but for 
a community of users – for example, those who might use a particular type of software tool as part of 
their professional practice.
ISO 9126 has separate documents to cater for these three sets of needs. Despite the size of this set of documen-
tation, it relates only to the deﬁ nition of software quality attributes. A separate standard, ISO 14598, describes 
the procedures that should be carried out when assessing the degree to which a software product conforms to 
the selected ISO 9126 quality characteristics. This might seem unnecessary, but it is argued that ISO 14598 
could be used to carry out an assessment using a different set of quality characteristics from those in ISO 
9126 if circumstances required it.
The difference between internal and external quality attributes has already been noted. ISO 9126 also intro-
duces another type of quality – quality in use – for which the following elements have been identiﬁ ed:
Maintainability can be 
seen from two differ-
ent perspectives. The 
user will be concerned 
with the elapsed time 
between a fault being 
detected and it being 
corrected, while the 
software development 
managers will be con-
cerned about the effort
involved.
Currently, in the UK, 
the main ISO 9126 
standard is known as 
BS ISO/IEC 9126-
1:2001. This is supple-
mented by some ‘tech-
nical reports’ (TRs), 
published in 2003, 
which are provisional 
standards. At the 
time of writing, a new 
standard in this area, 
ISO 25000, is being 
developed.

So ware Quality
293
 
● effectiveness: the ability to achieve user goals with accuracy and completeness;
 
● productivity: avoiding the excessive use of resources, such as staff effort, in achieving user goals;
 
● safety: within reasonable levels of risk of harm to people and other entities such as business, software, 
property and the environment;
 
● satisfaction: smiling users.
‘Users’ in this context includes not just those who operate the system containing the software, but also those 
who maintain and enhance the software. The idea of quality in use underlines how the required quality of 
the software is an attribute not just of the software but also of the context of use. For instance, in the IOE 
scenario, suppose the maintenance job reporting procedure varies considerably, depending on the type of 
equipment being serviced, because different inputs are needed to calculate the cost to IOE. Say that 95% of 
jobs currently involve maintaining photocopiers and 5% concern maintenance of printers. If the software is 
written for this application, then despite good testing, some errors might still get into the operational system. 
As these are reported and corrected, the software would become more ‘mature’ as faults become rarer. If there 
were a rapid switch so that more printer maintenance jobs were being processed, there could be an increase 
in reported faults as coding bugs in previously less heavily used parts of the software code for printer mainte-
nance were ﬂ ushed out by the larger number of printer maintenance transactions. Thus, changes to software 
use involve changes to quality requirements.
ISO 9126 identiﬁ es six major external software quality characteristics:
 
● functionality, which covers the functions that a software product provides to satisfy user needs;
 
● reliability, which relates to the capability of the software to maintain its level of performance;
 
● usability, which relates to the effort needed to use the software;
 
● efﬁ ciency, which relates to the physical resources used when the software is executed;
 
● maintainability, which relates to the effort needed to the make changes to the software;
 
● portability, which relates to the ability of the software to be transferred to a different environment.
ISO 9126 suggests sub-characteristics for each of the primary characteristics. They are useful as they clarify 
what is meant by each of the main characteristics.
Characteristic
Sub-characteristics
Functionality
Suitability
Accuracy
Interoperability
Functionality compliance
Security
‘Functionality compliance’ refers to the degree to which the software adheres to application-related standards 
or legal requirements. Typically these could be auditing requirements. Since the original 1999 draft, a 
sub-characteristic called ‘compliance’ has been added to all six ISO external characteristics. In each case, 
this refers to any speciﬁ c standards that might apply to the particular quality attribute.
‘Interoperability’ is a good illustration of the efforts of ISO 9126 to clarify terminology. ‘Interoperability’ 
refers to the ability of the software to interact with other systems. The framers of ISO 9126 have chosen this 

294
So ware Project Management
word rather than ‘compatibility’ because the latter causes confusion with the characteristic referred to by ISO 
9126 as ‘replaceability’ (see below).
Characteristic
Sub-characteristics
Reliability
Maturity
Fault tolerance
Recoverability
Reliability compliance
‘Maturity’ refers to the frequency of failure due to faults in a software product, the implication being that the 
more the software has been used, the more faults will have been uncovered and removed. It is also interesting 
to note that ‘recoverability’ has been clearly distinguished from ‘security’ which describes the control of 
access to a system.
Characteristic
Sub-characteristics
Usability
Understandability
Learnability
Operability
Attractiveness
Usability compliance
Note how ‘learnability’ is distinguished from ‘operability’. A software tool could be easy to learn but time-
consuming to use because, say, it uses a large number of nested menus. This might be ﬁ ne for a package used 
intermittently, but not where the system is used for many hours each day. In this case ‘learnability’ has been 
incorporated at the expense of ‘operability’.
‘Attractiveness’ is a recent addition to the sub-characteristics of usability and is especially important where 
users are not compelled to use a particular software product, as in the case of games and other entertainment 
products.
Characteristic
Sub-characteristics
Efﬁ ciency
Time behaviour
Resource utilization
Efﬁ ciency compliance
Maintainability
Analysability
Changeability
Stability
Testability
Maintainability compliance

So ware Quality
295
‘Analysability’ is the ease with which the cause of a failure can be determined. ‘Changeability’ is the quality 
that others call ‘ﬂ exibility’: the latter name is a better one as ‘changeability’ has a different connotation in 
plain English – it might imply that the suppliers of the software are always changing it!
‘Stability’, on the other hand, does not refer to software never changing: it means that there is a low risk of a 
modiﬁ cation to the software having unexpected effects.
Characteristic
Sub-characteristics
Portability
Adaptability
Installability
Coexistence
Replaceability
Portability compliance
‘Portability compliance’ relates to those standards that have a bearing on portability. 
The use of a standard programming language common to many software/hardware 
environments would be an example of this. ‘Replaceability’ refers to the factors that 
give ‘upwards compatibility’ between old software components and the new ones. 
‘Downwards’ compatibility is not implied by the deﬁ nition.
‘Coexistence’ refers to the ability of the software to share resources with other software 
components; unlike ‘interoperability’, no direct data passing is necessarily involved.
ISO 9126 provides guidelines for the use of the quality characteristics. Variation in 
the importance of different quality characteristics depending on the type of product is 
stressed. Once the requirements for the software product have been established, the 
following steps are suggested:
 
1. Judge the importance of each quality characteristic for the application Thus reliability will be of 
particular concern with safety-critical systems while efﬁ ciency will be important for some real-time 
systems.
 
2. Select the external quality measurements within the ISO 9126 framework relevant to the qualities 
prioritized above Thus for reliability mean time between failures would be an important measurement, 
while for efﬁ ciency, and more speciﬁ cally ‘time behaviour’, response time would be an obvious 
measurement.
 
3. Map measurements onto ratings that reﬂ ect user satisfaction For response time, for example, the 
mappings might be as in Table 13.1.
 
4. Identify the relevant internal measurements and the intermediate products in which they appear This
would only be important where software was being developed, rather than existing software being 
evaluated. For new software, the likely quality of the ﬁ nal product would need to be assessed during 
development. For example, where the external quality in question was time behaviour, at the software 
design stage an estimated execution time for a transaction could be produced by examining the software 
code and calculating the time for each instruction in a typical execution of the transaction. In our view 
the mappings between internal and external quality characteristics and measurements suggested in 
A new version of a 
word processing pack-
age might read the 
documents produced 
by previous versions 
and thus be able to 
replace them, but pre-
vious versions might 
not be able to read all 
documents created by 
the new version.

296
So ware Project Management
the ISO 9126 standard are the least convincing elements in the approach. The part of the standard that 
provides guidance at this point is a ‘technical report’ which is less authoritative than a full standard. It 
concedes that mapping external and internal measurements can be difﬁ cult and that validation to check 
that there is a meaningful correlation between the two in a speciﬁ c environment needs to be done. This 
reﬂ ects a real problem in the practical world of software development of examining code structure and 
from that attempting to predict accurately external qualities such as reliability.
TABLE 13.1
Mapping measurements to user sa sfac on
Response time (seconds)
Rating
<2
Exceeds expectation
2–5
Within the target range
6–10
Minimally acceptable
>10
Unacceptable
 
 According to ISO 9126, measurements that might act as indicators of the ﬁ nal quality of the software 
can be taken at different stages of the development life cycle. For products at the early stages these 
indicators might be qualitative. They could, for example, be based on checklists where compliance 
with predeﬁ ned criteria is assessed by expert judgement. As the product nears completion, objective, 
quantitative, measurements would increasingly be taken.
 
5. Overall assessment of product quality To what extent is it possible to combine ratings for different 
quality characteristics into a single overall rating for the software? A factor which discourages attempts 
at combining the assessments of different quality characteristics is that they can, in practice, be measured 
in very different ways, which makes comparison and combination difﬁ cult. Sometimes the presence 
of one quality could be to the detriment of another. For example, the efﬁ ciency characteristics of time 
behaviour and resource utilization could be enhanced by exploiting the particular characteristics of the 
operating system and hardware environments within which the software will perform. This, however, 
would probably be at the expense of portability.
 
 It was noted above that quality assessment could be carried out for a number of different reasons: to 
assist software development, acquisition or independent assessment.
 
 During the development of a software product, the assessment would be driven by the need to focus the 
minds of the developers on key quality requirements. The aim would be to identify possible weaknesses 
early on and there would be no need for an overall quality rating.
TABLE 13.2
Mapping response  mes onto user sa sfac on
Response time (seconds)
Quality score
<2
5
2–3
4
(Contd)

So ware Quality
297
4–5
3
6–7
2
8–9
1
>9
0
Where potential users are assessing a number of different software products in order to choose the best one, 
the outcome will be along the lines that product A is more satisfactory than product B or C. Here some idea 
of relative satisfaction exists and there is a justiﬁ cation in trying to model how this satisfaction might be 
formed. One approach recognizes some mandatory quality rating levels which a product must reach or be 
rejected, regardless of how good it is otherwise. Other characteristics might be desirable but not essential. 
For these a user satisfaction rating could be allocated in the range, say, 0–5. This could be based on having 
an objective measurement of some function and then relating different measurement values to different levels 
of user satisfaction – see Table 13.2.
Along with the rating for satisfaction, a rating in the range 1–5, say, could be assigned to reﬂ ect how important 
each quality characteristic was. The scores for each quality could be given due weight by multiplying it by its 
importance weighting. These weighted scores can then be summed to obtain an overall score for the product. 
The scores for various products are then put in the order of preference. For example, two products might be 
compared as to usability, efﬁ ciency and maintainability. The importance of each of these qualities might be 
rated as 3, 4 and 2, respectively, out of a possible maximum of 5. Quality tests might result in the situation 
shown in Table 13.3.
TABLE 13.3
Weighted quality scores
Product quality
Importance 
rating (a)
Product A
Product B
Quality score 
(b)
Weighted score 
(a 3 b)
Quality score 
(c)
Weighted score 
(a 3 c)
Usability
3
1
3
3
9
Efﬁ ciency
4
2
8
2
8
Maintainability
2
3
6
1
2
Overall
17
19
Finally, a quality assessment can be made on behalf of a user community as a whole. For example, a profes-
sional body might assess software tools that support the working practices of its members. Unlike the selection 
by an individual user/purchaser, this is an attempt to produce an objective assessment of the software indepen-
dently of a particular user environment. It is clear that the result of such an exercise would vary considerably 
depending on the weightings given to each software characteristic, and different users could have different 
requirements. Caution would be needed here.
(Contd)
The problem here is 
to map an objective 
measurement onto an 
indicator of customer 
satisfaction which is 
subjective.

298
So ware Project Management
13.6 Product and Process Metrics
We have already discussed in Section 13.4 that the users assess the quality of a software product based on 
its external attributes, whereas during development, the developers assess the product’s quality based on 
various internal attributes. We can also say that during development, the developers can ensure the quality 
of a software product based on a measurement of the relevant internal attributes. The internal attributes may 
measure either some aspects of the product (called product or of the development process (called process 
metrics). Let us understand the basic differences between product and process metrics.
 
● Product metrics help measure the characteristics of a product being developed. A few examples of 
product metrics and the speciﬁ c product characteristics that they measure are the following:  the LOC 
and function point metrics are used to measure size, the PM (person-month) metric is used to measure 
the effort required to develop a product, and the time required to develop the product is measured in 
months.
 
● Process metrics help measure how a development process is performing. Examples of process metrics 
are review effectiveness, average number of defects found per hour of inspection, average defect 
correction time, productivity, average number of failures detected during testing per LOC, and the 
number of latent defects per line of code in the developed product.
13.7 Product versus Process Quality Management
The measurements described above relate to products. With a product-based approach to planning and control, 
as advocated by the PRINCE2 project management method, this focus on products is convenient. However, 
we saw that it is often easier to measure these product qualities in a completed computer application rather 
than during its development. Trying to use the attributes of intermediate products created at earlier stages to 
predict the quality of the ﬁ nal application is difﬁ cult. An alternative approach is to scrutinize the quality of 
the processes used to develop software product.
The system development process comprises a number of activities linked so that the 
output from one activity is the input to the next (Figure 13.2). Errors can enter the 
process at any stage. They can be caused either by defects in a process, as when 
software developers make mistakes in the logic of their software, or by information 
not passing clearly and accurately between development stages.
Errors not removed at early stages become more expensive to correct at later stages. 
Each development step that passes before the error is found increases the amount of 
rework needed. An error in the speciﬁ cation found in testing will mean rework at all 
the stages between speciﬁ cation and testing. Each successive step of development is also more detailed and 
less able to absorb change.
Errors should therefore be eradicated by careful examination of the deliverables of each step before they are 
passed on. One way of doing this is by having the following process requirements for each step.
 
● Entry requirements, which have to be in place before an activity can start. An example would be that a 
comprehensive set of test data and expected results be prepared and approved before program testing 
can commence.
 
● Implementation requirements, which deﬁ ne how the process is to be conducted. In the testing phase, 
for example, it could be laid down that whenever an error is found and corrected, all test runs must be 
repeated, even those that have previously been found to run correctly.
Note that Extreme 
Programming advo-
cates suggest that the 
extra effort needed 
to amend software at 
later stages can be 
exaggerated and is, in 
any case, often justi-
ﬁ ed as adding value to 
the software.

So ware Quality
299
 
● Exit requirements, which have to be fulﬁ lled before an activity is deemed to have 
been completed. For example, for the testing phase to be recognized as being 
completed, all tests will have to have been run successfully with no outstanding 
errors.
 
EXERCISE 
13.4
In what cases might the entry conditions for one activity be different from the exit conditions for 
another activity that immediately precedes it?
 
EXERCISE 
13.5
What might be the entry and exit requirements for the process code program shown in Figure 13.2?
FIGURE 13.2
An example of the sequence of processes and deliverables
These requirements 
may be laid out in 
installation standards, 
or a Software Quality 
Plan may be drawn up 
for the speciﬁ c project 
if it is a major one.

692
PART FOUR
MANAGING SOFTWARE PROJECTS
feel confident that their planning will improve a project’s outcome. Since neither party
wants to do planning, it often doesn’t get done.
But failure to plan is one of the most critical mistakes a project can make . . . effective
planning is needed to resolve problems upstream [early in the project] at low cost, rather
than downstream [late in the project] at high cost. The average project spends 80 percent
of its time on rework—fixing mistakes that were made earlier in the project.
McConnell argues that every team can find the time to plan (and to adapt the plan
throughout the project) simply by taking a small percentage of the time that would
have been spent on rework that occurs because planning was not conducted.
26.1
OBSERVATIONS ON ESTIMATION
Planning requires you to make an initial commitment, even though it’s likely that this
“commitment” will be proven wrong. Whenever estimates are made, you look into
the future and accept some degree of uncertainty as a matter of course. To quote
Frederick Brooks [Bro95]:
. . . our techniques of estimating are poorly developed. More seriously, they reflect an
unvoiced assumption that is quite untrue, i.e., that all will go well. . . . because we are
uncertain of our estimates, software managers often lack the courteous stubbornness to
make people wait for a good product.
Although estimating is as much art as it is science, this important action need not be
conducted in a haphazard manner. Useful techniques for time and effort estimation
do exist. Process and project metrics can provide historical perspective and power-
ful input for the generation of quantitative estimates. Past experience (of all people
involved) can aid immeasurably as estimates are developed and reviewed. Because
estimation lays a foundation for all other project planning actions, and project plan-
ning provides the road map for successful software engineering, we would be ill
advised to embark without it.
Estimation of resources, cost, and schedule for a software engineering effort
requires experience, access to good historical information (metrics), and the courage
to commit to quantitative predictions when qualitative information is all that exists.
Estimation carries inherent risk,1 and this risk leads to uncertainty.
Project complexity has a strong effect on the uncertainty inherent in planning.
Complexity, however, is a relative measure that is affected by familiarity with past
effort. The first-time developer of a sophisticated e-commerce application might con-
sider it to be exceedingly complex. However, a Web engineering team developing its
tenth e-commerce WebApp would consider such work run-of-the-mill. A number of
quantitative software complexity measures have been proposed [Zus97]. Such mea-
sures are applied at the design or code level and are therefore difficult to use during
uote:
“Good estimating
approaches and
solid historical data
offer the best hope
that reality will win
out over impossible
demands.”
Caper Jones
1
Systematic techniques for risk analysis are presented in Chapter 28.
use cases . . . .705
WebApps . . . .714
feasibility . . . . .694
project
planning . . . . . .693
software 
equation . . . . . .711
software 
scope . . . . . . . .694

software planning (before a design and code exist). However, other, more subjective
assessments of complexity (e.g., function point complexity adjustment factors
described in Chapter 23) can be established early in the planning process.
Project size is another important factor that can affect the accuracy and efficacy of
estimates. As size increases, the interdependency among various elements of the
software grows rapidly.2 Problem decomposition, an important approach to estimat-
ing, becomes more difficult because the refinement of problem elements may still be
formidable. To paraphrase Murphy’s law: “What can go wrong will go wrong”—and
if there are more things that can fail, more things will fail.
The degree of structural uncertainty also has an effect on estimation risk. In this
context, structure refers to the degree to which requirements have been solidified,
the ease with which functions can be compartmentalized, and the hierarchical
nature of the information that must be processed.
The availability of historical information has a strong influence on estimation risk.
By looking back, you can emulate things that worked and improve areas where
problems arose. When comprehensive software metrics (Chapter 25) are available
for past projects, estimates can be made with greater assurance, schedules can
be established to avoid past difficulties, and overall risk is reduced.
Estimation risk is measured by the degree of uncertainty in the quantitative
estimates established for resources, cost, and schedule. If project scope is poorly
understood or project requirements are subject to change, uncertainty and estimation
risk become dangerously high. As a planner, you and the customer should recognize
that variability in software requirements means instability in cost and schedule.
However, you should not become obsessive about estimation. Modern software
engineering approaches (e.g., evolutionary process models) take an iterative view
of development. In such approaches, it is possible—although not always politically
acceptable—to revisit the estimate (as more information is known) and revise it
when the customer makes changes to requirements.
26.2
THE PROJECT PLANNING PROCESS
The objective of software project planning is to provide a framework that enables the
manager to make reasonable estimates of resources, cost, and schedule. In addition,
estimates should attempt to define best-case and worst-case scenarios so that proj-
ect outcomes can be bounded. Although there is an inherent degree of uncertainty,
the software team embarks on a plan that has been established as a consequence
of these tasks. Therefore, the plan must be adapted and updated as the project pro-
ceeds. In the following sections, each of the actions associated with software project
planning is discussed.
CHAPTER 26
ESTIMATION FOR SOFTWARE PROJECTS
693
uote:
“It is the mark of
an instructed mind
to rest satisfied
with the degree of
precision that the
nature of the sub-
ject admits, and not
to seek exactness
when only an
approximation
of the truth is
possible.”
Aristotle
Project complexity,
project size, and the
degree of structural
uncertainty all affect
the reliability of
estimates.
2
Size often increases due to “scope creep” that occurs when problem requirements change. In-
creases in project size can have a geometric impact on project cost and schedule (Michael Mah,
personal communication).
The more you know,
the better you
estimate. Therefore,
update your estimates
as the project
progresses.

694
PART FOUR
MANAGING SOFTWARE PROJECTS
Task Set for Project Planning
1. Establish project scope.
2. Determine feasibility.
3. Analyze risks (Chapter 28).
4. Define required resources.
a. Determine required human resources.
b. Define reusable software resources.
c. Identify environmental resources.
5. Estimate cost and effort.
a. Decompose the problem.
b. Develop two or more estimates using size, function
points, process tasks, or use cases.
c. Reconcile the estimates.
6. Develop a project schedule (Chapter 27).
a. Establish a meaningful task set.
b. Define a task network.
c. Use scheduling tools to develop a time-line chart.
d. Define schedule tracking mechanisms.
TASK SET
26.3
SOFTWARE SCOPE AND FEASIBILITY
Software scope describes the functions and features that are to be delivered to end
users; the data that are input and output; the “content” that is presented to users as
a consequence of using the software; and the performance, constraints, interfaces,
and reliability that bound the system. Scope is defined using one of two techniques:
1.
A narrative description of software scope is developed after communication
with all stakeholders.
2.
A set of use cases3 is developed by end users.
Functions described in the statement of scope (or within the use cases) are evaluated
and in some cases refined to provide more detail prior to the beginning of estimation.
Because both cost and schedule estimates are functionally oriented, some degree of
decomposition is often useful. Performance considerations encompass processing
and response time requirements. Constraints identify limits placed on the software by
external hardware, available memory, or other existing systems.
Once scope has been identified (with the concurrence of the customer), it is rea-
sonable to ask: “Can we build software to meet this scope? Is the project feasible?”
All too often, software engineers rush past these questions (or are pushed past
them by impatient managers or other stakeholders), only to become mired in a
project that is doomed from the onset. Putnam and Myers [Put97a] address this
issue when they write:
[N]ot everything imaginable is feasible, not even in software, evanescent as it may appear
to outsiders. On the contrary, software feasibility has four solid dimensions: Technology—
Is a project technically feasible? Is it within the state of the art? Can defects be reduced to
a level matching the application’s needs? Finance—Is it financially feasible? Can devel-
opment be completed at a cost the software organization, its client, or the market can
3
Use cases have been discussed in detail throughout Part 2 of this book. A use case is a scenario-
based description of the user’s interaction with the software from the user’s point of view.
Project feasibility is
important, but a
consideration of
business need is even
more important. It
does no good to build
a high-tech system or
product that no one
wants.

afford? Time—Will the project’s time-to-market beat the competition? Resources—Does
the organization have the resources needed to succeed?
Putnam and Myers correctly suggest that scoping is not enough. Once scope is un-
derstood, you must work to determine if it can be done within the dimensions just
noted. This is a crucial, although often overlooked, part of the estimation process.
26.4
RESOURCES
The second planning task is estimation of the resources required to accomplish the
software development effort. Figure 26.1 depicts the three major categories of soft-
ware engineering resources—people, reusable software components, and the devel-
opment environment (hardware and software tools). Each resource is specified with
four characteristics: description of the resource, a statement of availability, time
when the resource will be required, and duration of time that the resource will be
applied. The last two characteristics can be viewed as a time window. Availability of
the resource for a specified window must be established at the earliest practical time.
26.4.1
Human Resources
The planner begins by evaluating software scope and selecting the skills required to
complete development. Both organizational position (e.g., manager, senior software
engineer) and specialty (e.g., telecommunications, database, client-server) are
CHAPTER 26
ESTIMATION FOR SOFTWARE PROJECTS
695
Project
People
Environment
Reusable
software
Number
Skills
Location
Network
resources
Hardware
Software
tools
COTS
components
New
components
Full-experience
components
Part-experience
components
FIGURE 26.1
Project
resources

specified. For relatively small projects (a few person-months), a single individual may
perform all software engineering tasks, consulting with specialists as required. For
larger projects, the software team may be geographically dispersed across a number
of different locations. Hence, the location of each human resource is specified.
The number of people required for a software project can be determined only after
an estimate of development effort (e.g., person-months) is made. Techniques for
estimating effort are discussed later in this chapter.
26.4.2
Reusable Software Resources
Component-based software engineering (CBSE)4 emphasizes reusability—that is, the
creation and reuse of software building blocks. Such building blocks, often called
components, must be cataloged for easy reference, standardized for easy application,
and validated for easy integration. Bennatan [Ben00] suggests four software
resource categories that should be considered as planning proceeds:
Off-the-shelf components. Existing software that can be acquired from a third
party or from a past project. COTS (commercial off-the-shelf) components are pur-
chased from a third party, are ready for use on the current project, and have been
fully validated.
Full-experience components. Existing specifications, designs, code, or test data
developed for past projects that are similar to the software to be built for the
current project. Members of the current software team have had full experience
in the application area represented by these components. Therefore, modifications
required for full-experience components will be relatively low risk.
Partial-experience components. Existing specifications, designs, code, or test data
developed for past projects that are related to the software to be built for the cur-
rent project but will require substantial modification. Members of the current soft-
ware team have only limited experience in the application area represented by
these components. Therefore, modifications required for partial-experience com-
ponents have a fair degree of risk.
New components. Software components must be built by the software team
specifically for the needs of the current project.
Ironically, reusable software components are often neglected during planning, only
to become a paramount concern later in the software process. It is better to specify
software resource requirements early. In this way technical evaluation of the alter-
natives can be conducted and timely acquisition can occur.
26.4.3
Environmental Resources
The environment that supports a software project, often called the software engi-
neering environment (SEE), incorporates hardware and software. Hardware provides
696
PART FOUR
MANAGING SOFTWARE PROJECTS
4
CBSE is considered in Chapter 10.
Never forget that inte-
grating a variety of
reusable components
can be a significant
challenge. Worse, the
integration problem
resurfaces as various
components are
upgraded.

a platform that supports the tools (software) required to produce the work products
that are an outcome of good software engineering practice.5 Because most software
organizations have multiple constituencies that require access to the SEE, you must
prescribe the time window required for hardware and software and verify that these
resources will be available.
When a computer-based system (incorporating specialized hardware and soft-
ware) is to be engineered, the software team may require access to hardware
elements being developed by other engineering teams. For example, software for a
robotic device used within a manufacturing cell may require a specific robot (e.g., a
robotic welder) as part of the validation test step; a software project for advanced
page layout may need a high-speed digital printing system at some point during
development. Each hardware element must be specified as part of planning.
26.5
SOFTWARE PROJECT ESTIMATION
Software cost and effort estimation will never be an exact science. Too many
variables—human, technical, environmental, political—can affect the ultimate cost
of software and effort applied to develop it. However, software project estimation
can be transformed from a black art to a series of systematic steps that provide esti-
mates with acceptable risk. To achieve reliable cost and effort estimates, a number
of options arise:
1.
Delay estimation until late in the project (obviously, we can achieve 100 per-
cent accurate estimates after the project is complete!).
2.
Base estimates on similar projects that have already been completed.
3.
Use relatively simple decomposition techniques to generate project cost and
effort estimates.
4.
Use one or more empirical models for software cost and effort estimation.
Unfortunately, the first option, however attractive, is not practical. Cost estimates
must be provided up-front. However, you should recognize that the longer you wait,
the more you know, and the more you know, the less likely you are to make serious
errors in your estimates.
The second option can work reasonably well, if the current project is quite similar
to past efforts and other project influences (e.g., the customer, business conditions,
the software engineering environment, deadlines) are roughly equivalent. Unfortu-
nately, past experience has not always been a good indicator of future results.
The remaining options are viable approaches to software project estimation.
Ideally, the techniques noted for each option should be applied in tandem; each used
as a cross-check for the other. Decomposition techniques take a divide-and-conquer
CHAPTER 26
ESTIMATION FOR SOFTWARE PROJECTS
697
5
Other hardware—the target environment—is the computer on which the software will execute when
it has been released to the end user.
uote:
“In an age of
outsourcing and
increased
competition, the
ability to estimate
more accurately . . .
has emerged as a
critical success
factor for many IT
groups.”
Rob Thomsett

approach to software project estimation. By decomposing a project into major func-
tions and related software engineering activities, cost and effort estimation can be
performed in a stepwise fashion. Empirical estimation models can be used to com-
plement decomposition techniques and offer a potentially valuable estimation
approach in their own right. A model is based on experience (historical data) and
takes the form
d  f (vi)
where d is one of a number of estimated values (e.g., effort, cost, project duration)
and vi are selected independent parameters (e.g., estimated LOC or FP).
Automated estimation tools implement one or more decomposition techniques or
empirical models and provide an attractive option for estimating. In such systems,
the characteristics of the development organization (e.g., experience, environment)
and the software to be developed are described. Cost and effort estimates are derived
from these data.
Each of the viable software cost estimation options is only as good as the histor-
ical data used to seed the estimate. If no historical data exist, costing rests on a very
shaky foundation. In Chapter 25, we examined the characteristics of some of the
software metrics that provide the basis for historical estimation data.
26.6
DECOMPOSITION TECHNIQUES
Software project estimation is a form of problem solving, and in most cases, the
problem to be solved (i.e., developing a cost and effort estimate for a software
project) is too complex to be considered in one piece. For this reason, you should
decompose the problem, recharacterizing it as a set of smaller (and hopefully, more
manageable) problems.
In Chapter 24, the decomposition approach was discussed from two different points
of view: decomposition of the problem and decomposition of the process. Estimation
uses one or both forms of partitioning. But before an estimate can be made, you must
understand the scope of the software to be built and generate an estimate of its “size.”
26.6.1
Software Sizing
The accuracy of a software project estimate is predicated on a number of things:
(1) the degree to which you have properly estimated the size of the product to be built;
(2) the ability to translate the size estimate into human effort, calendar time, and dol-
lars (a function of the availability of reliable software metrics from past projects);
(3) the degree to which the project plan reflects the abilities of the software team; and
(4) the stability of product requirements and the environment that supports the soft-
ware engineering effort.
In this section, I consider the software sizing problem. Because a project estimate
is only as good as the estimate of the size of the work to be accomplished, sizing
698
PART FOUR
MANAGING SOFTWARE PROJECTS
uote:
“It is very difficult
to make a
vigorous, plausible
and job-risking
defense of an
estimate that is
derived by no
quantitative
method, supported
by little data, and
certified chiefly by
the hunches of the
managers.”
Fred Brooks
The “size” of software
to be built can be
estimated using a direct
measure, LOC, or an
indirect measure, FP.

represents your first major challenge as a planner. In the context of project planning,
size refers to a quantifiable outcome of the software project. If a direct approach is
taken, size can be measured in lines of code (LOC). If an indirect approach is chosen,
size is represented as function points (FP).
Putnam and Myers [Put92] suggest four different approaches to the sizing problem:
• “Fuzzy logic” sizing. This approach uses the approximate reasoning tech-
niques that are the cornerstone of fuzzy logic. To apply this approach, the
planner must identify the type of application, establish its magnitude on a
qualitative scale, and then refine the magnitude within the original range.
• Function point sizing. The planner develops estimates of the information
domain characteristics discussed in Chapter 23.
• Standard component sizing. Software is composed of a number of different
“standard components” that are generic to a particular application area. For
example, the standard components for an information system are subsys-
tems, modules, screens, reports, interactive programs, batch programs, files,
LOC, and object-level instructions. The project planner estimates the number
of occurrences of each standard component and then uses historical project
data to estimate the delivered size per standard component.
• Change sizing. This approach is used when a project encompasses the use of
existing software that must be modified in some way as part of a project. The
planner estimates the number and type (e.g., reuse, adding code, changing
code, deleting code) of modifications that must be accomplished.
Putnam and Myers suggest that the results of each of these sizing approaches be
combined statistically to create a three-point or expected-value estimate. This is
accomplished by developing optimistic (low), most likely, and pessimistic (high) val-
ues for size and combining them using Equation (26.1), described in Section 26.6.2.
26.6.2
Problem-Based Estimation
In Chapter 25, lines of code and function points were described as measures from
which productivity metrics can be computed. LOC and FP data are used in two ways
during software project estimation: (1) as estimation variables to “size” each element
of the software and (2) as baseline metrics collected from past projects and used in
conjunction with estimation variables to develop cost and effort projections.
LOC and FP estimation are distinct estimation techniques. Yet both have a num-
ber of characteristics in common. You begin with a bounded statement of software
scope and from this statement attempt to decompose the statement of scope into
problem functions that can each be estimated individually. LOC or FP (the estima-
tion variable) is then estimated for each function. Alternatively, you may choose
another component for sizing, such as classes or objects, changes, or business
processes affected.
CHAPTER 26
ESTIMATION FOR SOFTWARE PROJECTS
699
How do we
size the
software that
we’re planning
to build?
?
What do
LOC- and 
FP-based
estimation have
in common?
?

Baseline productivity metrics (e.g., LOC/pm or FP/pm6) are then applied to the
appropriate estimation variable, and cost or effort for the function is derived. Func-
tion estimates are combined to produce an overall estimate for the entire project.
It is important to note, however, that there is often substantial scatter in produc-
tivity metrics for an organization, making the use of a single-baseline productivity
metric suspect. In general, LOC/pm or FP/pm averages should be computed by proj-
ect domain. That is, projects should be grouped by team size, application area, com-
plexity, and other relevant parameters. Local domain averages should then be
computed. When a new project is estimated, it should first be allocated to a domain,
and then the appropriate domain average for past productivity should be used in
generating the estimate.
The LOC and FP estimation techniques differ in the level of detail required for de-
composition and the target of the partitioning. When LOC is used as the estimation
variable, decomposition is absolutely essential and is often taken to considerable
levels of detail. The greater the degree of partitioning, the more likely reasonably ac-
curate estimates of LOC can be developed.
For FP estimates, decomposition works differently. Rather than focusing on func-
tion, each of the information domain characteristics—inputs, outputs, data files, in-
quiries, and external interfaces—as well as the 14 complexity adjustment values
discussed in Chapter 23 are estimated. The resultant estimates can then be used to
derive an FP value that can be tied to past data and used to generate an estimate.
Regardless of the estimation variable that is used, you should begin by estimat-
ing a range of values for each function or information domain value. Using histor-
ical data or (when all else fails) intuition, estimate an optimistic, most likely, and
pessimistic size value for each function or count for each information domain
value. An implicit indication of the degree of uncertainty is provided when a range
of values is specified.
A three-point or expected value can then be computed. The expected value for the
estimation variable (size) S can be computed as a weighted average of the optimistic
(sopt), most likely (sm), and pessimistic (spess) estimates. For example,
S 
(26.1)
gives heaviest credence to the “most likely” estimate and follows a beta probability
distribution. We assume that there is a very small probability the actual size result
will fall outside the optimistic or pessimistic values.
Once the expected value for the estimation variable has been determined, histor-
ical LOC or FP productivity data are applied. Are the estimates correct? The only
reasonable answer to this question is: “You can’t be sure.” Any estimation technique,
no matter how sophisticated, must be cross-checked with another approach. Even
then, common sense and experience must prevail.
sopt  4sm  spess
6
700
PART FOUR
MANAGING SOFTWARE PROJECTS
6
The acronym pm means person-month of effort.
When collecting
productivity metrics for
projects, be sure to
establish a taxonomy
of project types. This
will enable you to
compute domain-
specific averages,
making estimation
more accurate.
How do we
compute the
“expected value“
for software
size?
?

26.6.3
An Example of LOC-Based Estimation
As an example of LOC and FP problem-based estimation techniques, I consider a
software package to be developed for a computer-aided design application for
mechanical components. The software is to execute on an engineering workstation
and must interface with various computer graphics peripherals including a mouse,
digitizer, high-resolution color display, and laser printer. A preliminary statement of
software scope can be developed:
The mechanical CAD software will accept two- and three-dimensional geometric data
from an engineer. The engineer will interact and control the CAD system through a user
interface that will exhibit characteristics of good human/machine interface design. All
geometric data and other supporting information will be maintained in a CAD database.
Design analysis modules will be developed to produce the required output, which will
be displayed on a variety of graphics devices. The software will be designed to control
and interact with peripheral devices that include a mouse, digitizer, laser printer, and
plotter.
This statement of scope is preliminary—it is not bounded. Every sentence would
have to be expanded to provide concrete detail and quantitative bounding. For
example, before estimation can begin, the planner must determine what “character-
istics of good human/machine interface design” means or what the size and
sophistication of the “CAD database” are to be.
For our purposes, assume that further refinement has occurred and that the major
software functions listed in Figure 26.2 are identified. Following the decomposition
technique for LOC, an estimation table (Figure 26.2) is developed. A range of LOC
estimates is developed for each function. For example, the range of LOC estimates
for the 3D geometric analysis function is optimistic, 4600 LOC; most likely, 6900 LOC;
and pessimistic, 8600 LOC. Applying Equation 26.1, the expected value for the 3D
geometric analysis function is 6800 LOC. Other estimates are derived in a similar
CHAPTER 26
ESTIMATION FOR SOFTWARE PROJECTS
701
Many modern applica-
tions reside on a
network or are part of
a client-server architec-
ture. Therefore, be
sure that your
estimates include the
effort required to
develop “infrastruc-
ture” software.
Function
User interface and control facilities (UICF)
Two-dimensional geometric analysis (2DGA)
Three-dimensional geometric analysis (3DGA)
Database management (DBM)
Computer graphics display facilities (CGDF)
Peripheral control function (PCF)
Design analysis modules (DAM)
Estimated lines of code
Estimated LOC
2,300
5,300
6,800
3,350
4,950
2,100
8,400
33,200
FIGURE 26.2
Estimation
table for the
LOC methods

fashion. By summing vertically in the estimated LOC column, an estimate of 33,200
lines of code is established for the CAD system.
A review of historical data indicates that the organizational average productivity
for systems of this type is 620 LOC/pm. Based on a burdened labor rate of $8000 per
month, the cost per line of code is approximately $13. Based on the LOC estimate
and the historical productivity data, the total estimated project cost is $431,000 and
the estimated effort is 54 person-months.7
702
PART FOUR
MANAGING SOFTWARE PROJECTS
7
Estimates are rounded to the nearest $1000 and person-month. Further precision is unnecessary
and unrealistic, given the limitations of estimation accuracy.
Estimating
The scene: Doug Miller’s office as
project planning begins.
The players: Doug Miller (manager of the SafeHome
software engineering team) and Vinod Raman, Jamie
Lazar, and other members of the product software
engineering team.
The conversation:
Doug: We need to develop an effort estimate for the
project and then we’ve got to define a micro schedule for
the first increment and a macro schedule for the
remaining increments.
Vinod (nodding): Okay, but we haven’t defined any
increments yet.
Doug: True, but that’s why we need to estimate.
Jamie (frowning): You want to know how long it’s
going to take us?
Doug: Here’s what I need. First, we need to functionally
decompose the SafeHome software … at a high level …
then we’ve got to estimate the number of lines of code
that each function will take . . . then . . .
Jamie: Whoa! How are we supposed to do that?
Vinod: I’ve done it on past projects. You begin with use
cases, determine the functionality required to implement
each, guesstimate the LOC count for each piece of the
function. The best approach is to have everyone do it
independently and then compare results.
Doug: Or you can do a functional decomposition for the
entire project.
Jamie: But that’ll take forever and we’ve got to get
started.
Vinod: No . . . it can be done in a few hours . . . this
morning, in fact.
Doug: I agree . . . we can’t expect exactitude, just a
ballpark idea of what the size of SafeHome will be.
Jamie: I think we should just estimate effort . . . that’s
all.
Doug: We’ll do that too. Then use both estimates as a
cross-check.
Vinod: Let’s go do it . . .
SAFEHOME
26.6.4
An Example of FP-Based Estimation
Decomposition for FP-based estimation focuses on information domain values
rather than software functions. Referring to the table presented in Figure 26.3, you
would estimate inputs, outputs, inquiries, files, and external interfaces for the CAD
software. An FP value is computed using the technique discussed in Chapter 23. For
the purposes of this estimate, the complexity weighting factor is assumed to be
average. Figure 26.3 presents the results of this estimate.
Do not succumb to the
temptation to use this
result as your project
estimate. You should
derive another result
using a different
approach.

Each of the complexity weighting factors is estimated, and the value adjustment
factor is computed as described in Chapter 23:
Factor
Value
Backup and recovery
4
Data communications
2
Distributed processing
0
Performance critical
4
Existing operating environment
3
Online data entry
4
Input transaction over multiple screens
5
Master files updated online
3
Information domain values complex
5
Internal processing complex
5
Code designed for reuse
4
Conversion/installation in design
3
Multiple installations
5
Application designed for change
5
Value adjustment factor
1.17
Finally, the estimated number of FP is derived:
FPestimated  count total  [0.65  0.01  (Fi)]  375
The organizational average productivity for systems of this type is 6.5 FP/pm. Based
on a burdened labor rate of $8000 per month, the cost per FP is approximately $1230.
Based on the FP estimate and the historical productivity data, the total estimated
project cost is $461,000 and the estimated effort is 58 person-months.
26.6.5
Process-Based Estimation
The most common technique for estimating a project is to base the estimate on the
process that will be used. That is, the process is decomposed into a relatively small
set of tasks and the effort required to accomplish each task is estimated.
CHAPTER 26
ESTIMATION FOR SOFTWARE PROJECTS
703
Information domain value
Number of external inputs
Number of external outputs
Number of external inquiries
Number of internal logical files
Number of external interface files
Count total
FP 
count
97
78
88
42
15
320
Opt.
20
12
16
4
2
Likely
24
15
22
4
2
Pess.
30
22
28
5
3
Est.
count
24
16
22
4
2
Weight
4
5
5
10
7
FIGURE 26.3
Estimating
information
domain values

Like the problem-based techniques, process-based estimation begins with a
delineation of software functions obtained from the project scope. A series of frame-
work activities must be performed for each function. Functions and related frame-
work activities8 may be represented as part of a table similar to the one presented in
Figure 26.4.
Once problem functions and process activities are melded, you estimate the effort
(e.g., person-months) that will be required to accomplish each software process
activity for each software function. These data constitute the central matrix of the
table in Figure 26.4. Average labor rates (i.e., cost/unit effort) are then applied to the
effort estimated for each process activity. It is very likely the labor rate will vary for
each task. Senior staff are heavily involved in early framework activities and are gen-
erally more expensive than junior staff involved in construction and release.
Costs and effort for each function and framework activity are computed as the last
step. If process-based estimation is performed independently of LOC or FP estima-
tion, we now have two or three estimates for cost and effort that may be compared
and reconciled. If both sets of estimates show reasonable agreement, there is good
reason to believe that the estimates are reliable. If, on the other hand, the results
of these decomposition techniques show little agreement, further investigation and
analysis must be conducted.
26.6.6
An Example of Process-Based Estimation
To illustrate the use of process-based estimation, consider the CAD software intro-
duced in Section 26.6.3. The system configuration and all software functions remain
unchanged and are indicated by project scope.
704
PART FOUR
MANAGING SOFTWARE PROJECTS
8
The framework activities chosen for this project differ somewhat from the generic activities dis-
cussed in Chapter 2. They are: customer communication (CC), planning, risk analysis, engineering,
and construction/release.
Activity
Task
Function
UICF
2DGA
3DGA
DBM
PCF
CGDF
DAM
Totals
% effort
CC
Planning
Risk
analysis
Engineering
Construction
release
Totals
CE
Analysis
Design
Code
Test
0.25
0.25
0.25
3.50
20.50
4.50
16.50
46.00
1%
1%
1%
8%
45%
10%
36%
CC = customer communication   CE = customer evaluation
0.50
0.75
0.50
0.50
0.50
0.25
2.50
4.00
4.00
3.00
3.00
2.00
0.40
0.60
1.00
1.00
0.75
0.50
5.00
2.00
3.00
1.50
1.50
1.50
8.40
7.35
8.50
6.00
5.75
4.25
0.50
2.00
0.50
2.00
5.00
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
FIGURE 26.4
Process-based
estimation
table
If time permits, use
finer granularity when
specifying tasks in
Figure 26.4. For
example, break
analysis into its major
tasks and estimate
each separately.

Referring to the completed process-based table shown in Figure 26.4, estimates
of effort (in person-months) for each software engineering activity are provided for
each CAD software function (abbreviated for brevity). The engineering and con-
struction release activities are subdivided into the major software engineering tasks
shown. Gross estimates of effort are provided for customer communication, plan-
ning, and risk analysis. These are noted in the total row at the bottom of the table.
Horizontal and vertical totals provide an indication of estimated effort required for
analysis, design, code, and test. It should be noted that 53 percent of all effort is ex-
pended on front-end engineering tasks (requirements analysis and design), indicat-
ing the relative importance of this work.
Based on an average burdened labor rate of $8000 per month, the total estimated
project cost is $368,000 and the estimated effort is 46 person-months. If desired,
labor rates could be associated with each framework activity or software engineer-
ing task and computed separately.
26.6.7
Estimation with Use Cases
As I have noted throughout Part 2 of this book, use cases provide a software team
with insight into software scope and requirements. However, developing an estima-
tion approach with use cases is problematic for the following reasons [Smi99]:
• Use cases are described using many different formats and styles—there is no
standard form.
• Use cases represent an external view (the user’s view) of the software and
can therefore be written at many different levels of abstraction.
• Use cases do not address the complexity of the functions and features that
are described.
• Use cases can describe complex behavior (e.g., interactions) that involve
many functions and features.
Unlike an LOC or a function point, one person’s “use case” may require months of
effort while another person’s use case may be implemented in a day or two.
Although a number of investigators have considered use cases as an estimation
input, no proven estimation method has emerged to date.9 Smith [Smi99] suggests
that use cases can be used for estimation, but only if they are considered within the
context of the “structural hierarchy” that they are used to describe.
Smith argues that any level of this structural hierarchy can be described by no
more than 10 use cases. Each of these use cases would encompass no more than 30
distinct scenarios. Obviously, use cases that describe a large system are written at a
much higher level of abstraction (and represent considerably more development
effort) than use cases that are written to describe a single subsystem. Therefore,
CHAPTER 26
ESTIMATION FOR SOFTWARE PROJECTS
705
uote:
“It’s best to
understand the
background of an
estimate before
you use it.”
Barry Boehm
and Richard
Fairley
Why is it
difficult to
develop an
estimation
technique using
use cases?
?
9
Recent work in the derivation of use-case points [Cle06] may ultimately lead to a workable
estimation approach using use cases.

before use cases can be used for estimation, the level within the structural hierarchy
is established, the average length (in pages) of each use case is determined, the type
of software (e.g., real-time, business, engineering/scientific, WebApp, embedded) is
defined, and a rough architecture for the system is considered. Once these charac-
teristics are established, empirical data may be used to establish the estimated num-
ber of LOC or FP per use case (for each level of the hierarchy). Historical data are then
used to compute the effort required to develop the system.
To illustrate how this computation might be made, consider the following
relationship:10
LOC estimate  N  LOCavg  [(Sa/Sh – 1)  (Pa/Ph  1)]  LOCadjust
(26.2)
where
N
 actual number of use cases
LOCavg
 historical average LOC per use case for this type of subsystem
LOCadjust
 represents an adjustment based on n percent of LOCavg where n
is defined locally and represents the difference between this
project and “average” projects
Sa
 actual scenarios per use case
Sh
 average scenarios per use case for this type of subsystem
Pa
 actual pages per use case
Ph
 average pages per use case for this type of subsystem
Expression (26.2) could be used to develop a rough estimate of the number of LOC
based on the actual number of use cases adjusted by the number of scenarios and
the page length of the use cases. The adjustment represents up to n percent of the
historical average LOC per use case.
26.6.8
An Example of Use-Case–Based Estimation
The CAD software introduced in Section 26.6.3 is composed of three subsystem
groups: user interface subsystem (includes UICF), engineering subsystem group
(includes the 2DGA, 3DGA, and DAM subsystems), and infrastructure subsystem
group (includes CGDF and PCF subsystems). Six use cases describe the user interface
subsystem. Each use case is described by no more than 10 scenarios and has an
average length of six pages. The engineering subsystem group is described by 10 use
cases (these are considered to be at a higher level of the structural hierarchy). Each
of these use cases has no more than 20 scenarios associated with it and has an
average length of eight pages. Finally, the infrastructure subsystem group is described
by five use cases with an average of only six scenarios and an average length of
five pages.
706
PART FOUR
MANAGING SOFTWARE PROJECTS
10 It is important to note that Expression (26.2) is used for illustrative purposes only. Like all estima-
tion models, it must be validated locally before it can be used with confidence.

Using the relationship noted in Expression (26.2) with n  30 percent, the table
shown in Figure 26.5 is developed. Considering the first row of the table, historical
data indicate that UI software requires an average of 800 LOC per use case when the
use case has no more than 12 scenarios and is described in less than five pages.
These data conform reasonably well for the CAD system. Hence the LOC estimate for
the user interface subsystem is computed using expression (26.2). Using the same
approach, estimates are made for both the engineering and infrastructure subsystem
groups. Figure 26.5 summarizes the estimates and indicates that the overall size of
the CAD is estimated at 42,500 LOC.
Using 620 LOC/pm as the average productivity for systems of this type and
a burdened labor rate of $8000 per month, the cost per line of code is approxi-
mately $13. Based on the use-case estimate and the historical productivity data, the
total estimated project cost is $552,000 and the estimated effort is 68 person-
months.
26.6.9
Reconciling Estimates
The estimation techniques discussed in the preceding sections result in multiple
estimates that must be reconciled to produce a single estimate of effort, project
duration, or cost. To illustrate this reconciliation procedure, I again consider the CAD
software introduced in Section 26.6.3.
The total estimated effort for the CAD software ranges from a low of 46 person-
months (derived using a process-based estimation approach) to a high of 68 person-
months (derived with use-case estimation). The average estimate (using all four
approaches) is 56 person-months. The variation from the average estimate is approxi-
mately 18 percent on the low side and 21 percent on the high side.
What happens when agreement between estimates is poor? The answer to this
question requires a reevaluation of information used to make the estimates. Widely
divergent estimates can often be traced to one of two causes: (1) the scope of the
project is not adequately understood or has been misinterpreted by the planner, or
(2) productivity data used for problem-based estimation techniques is inappropriate
for the application, obsolete (in that it no longer accurately reflects the software
engineering organization), or has been misapplied. You should determine the cause
of divergence and then reconcile the estimates.
CHAPTER 26
ESTIMATION FOR SOFTWARE PROJECTS
707
User interface subsystem
Engineering subsystem group
Infrastructure subsystem group
Total LOC estimate
use cases
6
10
5
scenarios
10
20
6
scenarios
12
16
10
pages
6
8
5
pages
5
8
6
LOC
560
3100
1650
LOC estimate
3,366
31,233
7,970
42,568
FIGURE 26.5
Use-case
estimation
uote:
“Complicated
methods might not
yield a more
accurate estimate,
particularly when
developers can
incorporate their
own intuition into
the estimate.”
Philip Johnson
et al.

26.7
EMPIRICAL ESTIMATION MODELS
An estimation model for computer software uses empirically derived formulas to
predict effort as a function of LOC or FP.11 Values for LOC or FP are estimated using
the approach described in Sections 26.6.3 and 26.6.4. But instead of using the tables
described in those sections, the resultant values for LOC or FP are plugged into the
estimation model.
The empirical data that support most estimation models are derived from a lim-
ited sample of projects. For this reason, no estimation model is appropriate for all
classes of software and in all development environments. Therefore, you should use
the results obtained from such models judiciously.
An estimation model should be calibrated to reflect local conditions. The model
should be tested by applying data collected from completed projects, plugging the
data into the model, and then comparing actual to predicted results. If agreement is
poor, the model must be tuned and retested before it can be used.
708
PART FOUR
MANAGING SOFTWARE PROJECTS
Automated Estimation Techniques for Software Projects
INFO
Automated estimation tools allow the planner
to estimate cost and effort and to perform
what-if analyses for important project variables
such as delivery date or staffing. Although many
automated estimation tools exist (see sidebar later in this
chapter), all exhibit the same general characteristics and
all perform the following six generic functions [Jon96]:
1.
Sizing of project deliverables. The “size” of one or
more software work products is estimated. Work
products include the external representation of
software (e.g., screen, reports), the software itself
(e.g., KLOC), functionality delivered (e.g., function
points), and descriptive information (e.g., documents).
2.
Selecting project activities. The appropriate process
framework is selected, and the software engineering
task set is specified.
3.
Predicting staffing levels. The number of people who
will be available to do the work is specified. Because
the relationship between people available and work
(predicted effort) is highly nonlinear, this is an
important input.
4.
Predicting software effort. Estimation tools use one
or more models (Section 26.7) that relate the size of
the project deliverables to the effort required to
produce them.
5.
Predicting software cost. Given the results of step 4,
costs can be computed by allocating labor rates to
the project activities noted in step 2.
6.
Predicting software schedules. When effort, staffing
level, and project activities are known, a draft
schedule can be produced by allocating labor across
software engineering activities based on
recommended models for effort distribution
discussed later in this chapter.
When different estimation tools are applied to the same
project data, a relatively large variation in estimated
results can be encountered. More important, predicted
values sometimes are significantly different than actual
values. This reinforces the notion that the output of
estimation tools should be used as one “data point” from
which estimates are derived—not as the only source for
an estimate.
11 An empirical model using use cases as the independent variable is suggested in Section 26.6.6.
However, relatively few have appeared in the literature to date.
An estimation model
reflects the population
of projects from which
it has been derived.
Therefore, the model is
domain sensitive.

26.7.1
The Structure of Estimation Models
A typical estimation model is derived using regression analysis on data collected from
past software projects. The overall structure of such models takes the form [Mat94]
E  A  B  (ev)C
(26.3)
where A, B, and C are empirically derived constants, E is effort in person-months, and
ev is the estimation variable (either LOC or FP). In addition to the relationship noted
in Equation (26.3), the majority of estimation models have some form of project ad-
justment component that enables E to be adjusted by other project characteristics
(e.g., problem complexity, staff experience, development environment). Among the
many LOC-oriented estimation models proposed in the literature are
E  5.2  (KLOC)0.91
Walston-Felix model
E  5.5  0.73  (KLOC)1.16
Bailey-Basili model
E  3.2  (KLOC)1.05
Boehm simple model
E  5.288  (KLOC)1.047
Doty model for KLOC  9
FP-oriented models have also been proposed. These include
E  91.4  0.355 FP
Albrecht and Gaffney model
E  37  0.96 FP
Kemerer model
E  12.88  0.405 FP
Small project regression model
A quick examination of these models indicates that each will yield a different result
for the same values of LOC or FP. The implication is clear. Estimation models must
be calibrated for local needs!
26.7.2
The COCOMO II Model
In his classic book on “software engineering economics,” Barry Boehm [Boe81]
introduced a hierarchy of software estimation models bearing the name COCOMO, for
COnstructive COst MOdel. The original COCOMO model became one of the most widely
used and discussed software cost estimation models in the industry. It has evolved into
a more comprehensive estimation model, called COCOMO II [Boe00]. Like its predeces-
sor, COCOMO II is actually a hierarchy of estimation models that address the following
areas:
• Application composition model. Used during the early stages of software engi-
neering, when prototyping of user interfaces, consideration of software and
system interaction, assessment of performance, and evaluation of technology
maturity are paramount.
• Early design stage model. Used once requirements have been stabilized and
basic software architecture has been established.
• Post-architecture-stage model. Used during the construction of the software.
Like all estimation models for software, the COCOMO II models require sizing
information. Three different sizing options are available as part of the model
hierarchy: object points, function points, and lines of source code.
CHAPTER 26
ESTIMATION FOR SOFTWARE PROJECTS
709
None of these models
should be used without
careful calibration to
your environment.
WebRef
Detailed information on
COCOMO II, including
downloadable software,
can be obtained at 
sunset.usc.edu/
research/
COCOMOII/
cocomo_main.html.

The COCOMO II application composition model uses object points and is illus-
trated in the following paragraphs. It should be noted that other, more sophisticated
estimation models (using FP and KLOC) are also available as part of COCOMO II.
Like function points, the object point is an indirect software measure that is com-
puted using counts of the number of (1) screens (at the user interface), (2) reports,
and (3) components likely to be required to build the application. Each object in-
stance (e.g., a screen or report) is classified into one of three complexity levels (i.e.,
simple, medium, or difficult) using criteria suggested by Boehm [Boe96]. In essence,
complexity is a function of the number and source of the client and server data tables
that are required to generate the screen or report and the number of views or sec-
tions presented as part of the screen or report.
Once complexity is determined, the number of screens, reports, and components
are weighted according to the table illustrated in Figure 26.6. The object point count
is then determined by multiplying the original number of object instances by the
weighting factor in the figure and summing to obtain a total object point count.
When component-based development or general software reuse is to be applied,
the percent of reuse (%reuse) is estimated and the object point count is adjusted:
NOP  (object points)  [(100  %reuse)/100]
where NOP is defined as new object points.
To derive an estimate of effort based on the computed NOP value, a “productivity
rate” must be derived. Figure 26.7 presents the productivity rate
PROD 
for different levels of developer experience and development environment maturity.
Once the productivity rate has been determined, an estimate of project effort is
computed using
Estimated effort 
In more advanced COCOMO II models,12 a variety of scale factors, cost drivers,
and adjustment procedures are required. A complete discussion of these is beyond
NOP
PROD
NOP
person-month
710
PART FOUR
MANAGING SOFTWARE PROJECTS
Object type
Screen
Report
3GL component
Complexity weight
Simple
Medium
Difficult
1
2
3
2
5
8
10
FIGURE 26.6
Complexity
weighting for
object types.
Source: [Boe96].
What is an
object point?
?
12 As noted earlier, these models use FP and KLOC counts for the size variable.

the scope of this book. If you have further interest, see [Boe00] or visit the COCOMO II
website.
26.7.3
The Software Equation
The software equation [Put92] is a dynamic multivariable model that assumes a spe-
cific distribution of effort over the life of a software development project. The model
has been derived from productivity data collected for over 4000 contemporary soft-
ware projects. Based on these data, we derive an estimation model of the form
E 

(26.4)
where
E  effort in person-months or person-years
t  project duration in months or years
B  “special skills factor”13
P  “productivity parameter” that reflects: overall process maturity and man-
agement practices, the extent to which good software engineering practices
are used, the level of programming languages used, the state of the soft-
ware environment, the skills and experience of the software team, and the
complexity of the application
Typical values might be P  2000 for development of real-time embedded software,
P  10,000 for telecommunication and systems software, and P  28,000 for business
systems applications. The productivity parameter can be derived for local conditions
using historical data collected from past development efforts.
You should note that the software equation has two independent parameters:
(1) an estimate of size (in LOC) and (2) an indication of project duration in calendar
months or years.
1
t4
LOC  B0.333
P3
CHAPTER 26
ESTIMATION FOR SOFTWARE PROJECTS
711
Developer's experience/capability
Environment maturity/capability
PROD
Very
low
Very
low
4
Low
Low
7
Nominal
Nominal
13
High
High
25
Very
high
Very
high
50
FIGURE 26.7
Productivity rate for object points.
Source: [Boe96].
13 B increases slowly as “the need for integration, testing, quality assurance, documentation, and
management skills grows” [Put92]. For small programs (KLOC  5 to 15), B  0.16. For programs
greater than 70 KLOC, B  0.39.
WebRef
Information on
software cost
estimation tools that
have evolved from
the software equation
can be found at 
www.qsm.com.

To simplify the estimation process and use a more common form for their
estimation model, Putnam and Myers [Put92] suggest a set of equations derived from
the software equation. Minimum development time is defined as
tmin  8.14 
in months for tmin  6 months
(26.5a)
E  180 Bt3 in person-months for E  20 person-months
(26.5b)
Note that t in Equation (26.5b) is represented in years.
Using Equation (26.5) with P  12,000 (the recommended value for scientific
software) for the CAD software discussed earlier in this chapter,
tmin  8.14 
 12.6 calendar months
E  180  0.28  (1.05)3  58 person-months
The results of the software equation correspond favorably with the estimates devel-
oped in Section 26.6. Like the COCOMO model noted in Section 26.7.2, the software
equation continues to evolve. Further discussion of an extended version of this
estimation approach can be found in [Put97b].
26.8
ESTIMATION FOR OBJECT-ORIENTED PROJECTS
It is worthwhile to supplement conventional software cost estimation methods with a
technique that has been designed explicitly for OO software. Lorenz and Kidd [Lor94]
suggest the following approach:
1.
Develop estimates using effort decomposition, FP analysis, and any other
method that is applicable for conventional applications.
2.
Using the requirements model (Chapter 6), develop use cases and determine
a count. Recognize that the number of use cases may change as the project
progresses.
3.
From the requirements model, determine the number of key classes (called
analysis classes in Chapter 6).
4.
Categorize the type of interface for the application and develop a multiplier
for support classes:
Interface Type
Multiplier
No GUI
2.0
Text-based user interface
2.25
GUI
2.5
Complex GUI
3.0
Multiply the number of key classes (step 3) by the multiplier to obtain an
estimate for the number of support classes.
33,200
12,0000.43
LOC
p0.43
712
PART FOUR
MANAGING SOFTWARE PROJECTS
