It’s reasonable to argue that the techniques I’ll discuss in this chapter are not a
true “solution” to the challenges just noted. But they do provide a solid approach for
addressing these challenges.
5.1
REQUIREMENTS ENGINEERING
Designing and building computer software is challenging, creative, and just plain
fun. In fact, building software is so compelling that many software developers want
to jump right in before they have a clear understanding of what is needed. They argue
that things will become clear as they build, that project stakeholders will be able to
understand need only after examining early iterations of the software, that things
change so rapidly that any attempt to understand requirements in detail is a waste
of time, that the bottom line is producing a working program and all else is second-
ary. What makes these arguments seductive is that they contain elements of truth.1
But each is flawed and can lead to a failed software project.
The broad spectrum of tasks and techniques that lead to an understanding of re-
quirements is called requirements engineering. From a software process perspective,
requirements engineering is a major software engineering action that begins during
the communication activity and continues into the modeling activity. It must be
adapted to the needs of the process, the project, the product, and the people doing
the work.
Requirements engineering builds a bridge to design and construction. But where
does the bridge originate? One could argue that it begins at the feet of the project
stakeholders (e.g., managers, customers, end users), where business need is
defined, user scenarios are described, functions and features are delineated, and
project constraints are identified. Others might suggest that it begins with a broader
system definition, where software is but one component of the larger system
domain. But regardless of the starting point, the journey across the bridge takes you
120
PART TWO
MODELING
uote:
“Thehardestsingle
partofbuildinga
softwaresystem
is decidingwhatto
build.Nopartofthe
worksocripplesthe
resultingsystemif
donewrong.No
otherpartismore
difficulttorectify
later.”
Fred Brooks
Requirements
engineering establishes
a solid base for design
and construction.
Without it, the
resulting software has
a high probability of
not meeting
customer’s needs.
1
This is particularly true for small projects (less than one month) and smaller, relatively simple soft-
ware efforts. As software grows in size and complexity, these arguments begin to break down.
requirements
engineering . . .120
requirements
gathering . . . . .128
requirements
management . .124
specification . . .122
stakeholders . .125
use cases . . . . .133
validating
requirements . .144
validation . . . . .123
viewpoints . . . .126
work 
products . . . . . .133
in the project, after deadline commitments have been made, reputations are on the line,
and serious money is at stake.
All of us who have worked in the systems and software business for more than a few
years have lived this nightmare, and yet, few of us have learned to make it go away. We
struggle when we try to elicit requirements from our customers. We have trouble under-
standing the information that we do acquire. We often record requirements in a disor-
ganized manner, and we spend far too little time verifying what we do record. We allow
change to control us, rather than establishing mechanisms to control change. In short, we
fail to establish a solid foundation for the system or software. Each of these problems is
challenging. When they are combined, the outlook is daunting for even the most experi-
enced managers and practitioners. But solutions do exist.
MODULE 2

high above the project, allowing you to examine the context of the software work to
be performed; the specific needs that design and construction must address; the pri-
orities that guide the order in which work is to be completed; and the information,
functions, and behaviors that will have a profound impact on the resultant design.
Requirements engineering provides the appropriate mechanism for understand-
ing what the customer wants, analyzing need, assessing feasibility, negotiating a rea-
sonable solution, specifying the solution unambiguously, validating the specification,
and managing the requirements as they are transformed into an operational system
[Tha97]. It encompasses seven distinct tasks: inception, elicitation, elaboration,
negotiation, specification, validation, and management. It is important to note that
some of these tasks occur in parallel and all are adapted to the needs of the project.
Inception.
How does a software project get started? Is there a single event that
becomes the catalyst for a new computer-based system or product, or does the need
evolve over time? There are no definitive answers to these questions. In some cases,
a casual conversation is all that is needed to precipitate a major software engineer-
ing effort. But in general, most projects begin when a business need is identified
or a potential new market or service is discovered. Stakeholders from the business
community (e.g., business managers, marketing people, product managers) define
a business case for the idea, try to identify the breadth and depth of the market, do a
rough feasibility analysis, and identify a working description of the project’s scope.
All of this information is subject to change, but it is sufficient to precipitate discus-
sions with the software engineering organization.2
At project inception,3 you establish a basic understanding of the problem, the peo-
ple who want a solution, the nature of the solution that is desired, and the effective-
ness of preliminary communication and collaboration between the other stakeholders
and the software team.
Elicitation.
It certainly seems simple enough—ask the customer, the users, and
others what the objectives for the system or product are, what is to be accomplished,
how the system or product fits into the needs of the business, and finally, how the sys-
tem or product is to be used on a day-to-day basis. But it isn’t simple—it’s very hard.
Christel and Kang [Cri92] identify a number of problems that are encountered as
elicitation occurs.
• Problems of scope. The boundary of the system is ill-defined or the
customers/users specify unnecessary technical detail that may confuse,
rather than clarify, overall system objectives.
CHAPTER 5
UNDERSTANDING REQUIREMENTS
121
Expect to do a bit of
design during require-
ments work and a bit
of requirements work
during design.
uote:
“The seeds of
major software
disasters are
usually sown in the
first three months
of commencing the
software project.”
Caper Jones
2
If a computer-based system is to be developed, discussions begin within the context of a system
engineering process. For a detailed discussion of system engineering, visit the website that
accompanies this book.
3
Recall that the Unified Process (Chapter 2) defines a more comprehensive “inception phase” that
encompasses the inception, elicitation, and elaboration tasks discussed in this chapter.
Why is it
difficult to
gain a clear
understanding of
what the
customer wants?
?

122
PART TWO
MODELING
• Problems of understanding. The customers/users are not completely sure
of what is needed, have a poor understanding of the capabilities and limita-
tions of their computing environment, don’t have a full understanding of the
problem domain, have trouble communicating needs to the system engineer,
omit information that is believed to be “obvious,” specify requirements that
conflict with the needs of other customers/users, or specify requirements
that are ambiguous or untestable.
• Problems of volatility. The requirements change over time.
To help overcome these problems, you must approach requirements gathering in an
organized manner.
Elaboration.
The information obtained from the customer during inception and
elicitation is expanded and refined during elaboration. This task focuses on devel-
oping a refined requirements model (Chapters 6 and 7) that identifies various aspects
of software function, behavior, and information.
Elaboration is driven by the creation and refinement of user scenarios that de-
scribe how the end user (and other actors) will interact with the system. Each user
scenario is parsed to extract analysis classes—business domain entities that are
visible to the end user. The attributes of each analysis class are defined, and the serv-
ices4 that are required by each class are identified. The relationships and collabora-
tion between classes are identified, and a variety of supplementary diagrams are
produced.
Negotiation.
It isn’t unusual for customers and users to ask for more than can be
achieved, given limited business resources. It’s also relatively common for different
customers or users to propose conflicting requirements, arguing that their version is
“essential for our special needs.”
You have to reconcile these conflicts through a process of negotiation. Customers,
users, and other stakeholders are asked to rank requirements and then discuss con-
flicts in priority. Using an iterative approach that prioritizes requirements, assesses
their cost and risk, and addresses internal conflicts, requirements are eliminated,
combined, and/or modified so that each party achieves some measure of satisfaction.
Specification.
In the context of computer-based systems (and software), the term
specification means different things to different people. A specification can be a writ-
ten document, a set of graphical models, a formal mathematical model, a collection
of usage scenarios, a prototype, or any combination of these.
Some suggest that a “standard template” [Som97] should be developed and used
for a specification, arguing that this leads to requirements that are presented in a
Elaboration is a good
thing, but you have to
know when to stop.
The key is to describe
the problem in a way
that establishes a firm
base for design. If you
work beyond that
point, you’re doing
design.
4
A service manipulates the data encapsulated by the class. The terms operation and method are also
used. If you are unfamiliar with object-oriented concepts, a basic introduction is presented in
Appendix 2.
There should be no
winner and no loser in
an effective negotia-
tion. Both sides win,
because a “deal” that
both can live with is
solidified.

The formality and
format of a specifica-
tion varies with the size
and the complexity of
the software to be built.
consistent and therefore more understandable manner. However, it is sometimes
necessary to remain flexible when a specification is to be developed. For large sys-
tems, a written document, combining natural language descriptions and graphical
models may be the best approach. However, usage scenarios may be all that are re-
quired for smaller products or systems that reside within well-understood technical
environments.
CHAPTER 5
UNDERSTANDING REQUIREMENTS
123
Software Requirements Specification Template
A software requirements specification (SRS) is
a document that is created when a detailed
description of all aspects of the software to be built must be
specified before the project is to commence. It is important
to note that a formal SRS is not always written. In fact,
there are many instances in which effort expended on an
SRS might be better spent in other software engineering
activities. However, when software is to be developed by
a third party, when a lack of specification would create
severe business issues, or when a system is extremely
complex or business critical, an SRS may be justified.
Karl Wiegers [Wie03] of Process Impact Inc. has
developed a worthwhile template (available at
www.processimpact.com/process_assets/srs_
template.doc) that can serve as a guideline for those
who must create a complete SRS. A topic outline follows:
Table of Contents
Revision History
1.
Introduction
1.1
Purpose
1.2
Document Conventions
1.3
Intended Audience and Reading Suggestions
1.4
Project Scope
1.5
References
2.
Overall Description
2.1
Product Perspective
2.2
Product Features
2.3
User Classes and Characteristics
2.4
Operating Environment
2.5
Design and Implementation Constraints
2.6
User Documentation
2.7
Assumptions and Dependencies
3.
System Features
3.1
System Feature 1
3.2
System Feature 2 (and so on)
4.
External Interface Requirements
4.1
User Interfaces
4.2
Hardware Interfaces
4.3
Software Interfaces
4.4
Communications Interfaces
5.
Other Nonfunctional Requirements
5.1
Performance Requirements
5.2
Safety Requirements
5.3
Security Requirements
5.4
Software Quality Attributes
6.
Other Requirements
Appendix A: Glossary
Appendix B: Analysis Models
Appendix C: Issues List
A detailed description of each SRS topic can be obtained
by downloading the SRS template at the URL noted earlier
in this sidebar.
INFO
Validation.
The work products produced as a consequence of requirements engi-
neering are assessed for quality during a validation step. Requirements validation
examines the specification5 to ensure that all software requirements have been
5
Recall that the nature of the specification will vary with each project. In some cases, the “specifi-
cation” is a collection of user scenarios and little else. In others, the specification may be a docu-
ment that contains scenarios, models, and written descriptions.

stated unambiguously; that inconsistencies, omissions, and errors have been
detected and corrected; and that the work products conform to the standards estab-
lished for the process, the project, and the product.
The primary requirements validation mechanism is the technical review (Chap-
ter 15). The review team that validates requirements includes software engineers,
customers, users, and other stakeholders who examine the specification looking
for errors in content or interpretation, areas where clarification may be required,
missing information, inconsistencies (a major problem when large products or
systems are engineered), conflicting requirements, or unrealistic (unachievable)
requirements.
124
PART TWO
MODELING
INFO
Requirements management.
Requirements for computer-based systems
change, and the desire to change requirements persists throughout the life of the
system. Requirements management is a set of activities that help the project team
identify, control, and track requirements and changes to requirements at any time as
the project proceeds.6 Many of these activities are identical to the software configu-
ration management (SCM) techniques discussed in Chapter 22.
6
Formal requirements management is initiated only for large projects that have hundreds of identi-
fiable requirements. For small projects, this requirements engineering action is considerably less
formal.
Requirements Validation
Checklist
It is often useful to examine each requirement
against a set of checklist questions. Here is a small subset
of those that might be asked:
• Are requirements stated clearly? Can they be
misinterpreted?
• Is the source (e.g., a person, a regulation, a document)
of the requirement identified? Has the final statement of
the requirement been examined by or against the
original source?
• Is the requirement bounded in quantitative terms?
• What other requirements relate to this requirement? Are
they clearly noted via a cross-reference matrix or other
mechanism?
• Does the requirement violate any system domain
constraints?
• Is the requirement testable? If so, can we specify tests
(sometimes called validation criteria) to exercise the
requirement?
• Is the requirement traceable to any system model that
has been created?
• Is the requirement traceable to overall system/product
objectives?
• Is the specification structured in a way that leads to
easy understanding, easy reference, and easy
translation into more technical work products?
• Has an index for the specification been created?
• Have requirements associated with performance,
behavior, and operational characteristics been clearly
stated? What requirements appear to be implicit?
A key concern during
requirements valida-
tion is consistency. Use
the analysis model to
ensure that require-
ments have been con-
sistently stated.

5.2
ESTABLISHING THE GROUNDWORK
In an ideal setting, stakeholders and software engineers work together on the same
team.8 In such cases, requirements engineering is simply a matter of conducting
meaningful conversations with colleagues who are well-known members of the
team. But reality is often quite different.
Customer(s) or end users may be located in a different city or country, may have
only a vague idea of what is required, may have conflicting opinions about the sys-
tem to be built, may have limited technical knowledge, and may have limited time to
interact with the requirements engineer. None of these things are desirable, but all
are fairly common, and you are often forced to work within the constraints imposed
by this situation.
In the sections that follow, I discuss the steps required to establish the ground-
work for an understanding of software requirements—to get the project started in a
way that will keep it moving forward toward a successful solution.
5.2.1
Identifying Stakeholders
Sommerville and Sawyer [Som97] define a stakeholder as “anyone who benefits
in a direct or indirect way from the system which is being developed.” I have already
CHAPTER 5
UNDERSTANDING REQUIREMENTS
125
Requirements Engineering
Objective: Requirements engineering tools
assist in requirements gathering, requirements
modeling, requirements management, and requirements
validation.
Mechanics: Tool mechanics vary. In general,
requirements engineering tools build a variety of
graphical (e.g., UML) models that depict the informational,
functional, and behavioral aspects of a system. These
models form the basis for all other activities in the
software process.
Representative Tools:7
A reasonably comprehensive (and up-to-date) listing of
requirements engineering tools can be found at the Volvere
Requirements resources site at www.volere.co.uk/
tools.htm. Requirements modeling tools are discussed in
Chapters 6 and 7. Tools noted below focus on requirement
management.
EasyRM, developed by Cybernetic Intelligence GmbH
(www.easy-rm.com), builds a project-specific
dictionary/glossary that contains detailed requirements
descriptions and attributes.
Rational RequisitePro, developed by Rational Software
(www-306.ibm.com/software/awdtools/
reqpro/), allows users to build a requirements
database; represent relationships among requirements;
and organize, prioritize, and trace requirements.
Many additional requirements management tools can be
found at the Volvere site noted earlier and at 
www.jiludwig.com/Requirements_
Management_Tools.html.
SOFTWARE TOOLS
7
Tools noted here do not represent an endorsement, but rather a sampling of tools in this category.
In most cases, tool names are trademarked by their respective developers.
8
This approach is strongly recommended for projects that adopt an agile software development
philosophy.
A stakeholder is
anyone who has a
direct interest in or
benefits from the
system that is to be
developed.

identified the usual suspects: business operations managers, product managers,
marketing people, internal and external customers, end users, consultants, product
engineers, software engineers, support and maintenance engineers, and others.
Each stakeholder has a different view of the system, achieves different benefits when
the system is successfully developed, and is open to different risks if the development
effort should fail.
At inception, you should create a list of people who will contribute input as re-
quirements are elicited (Section 5.3). The initial list will grow as stakeholders are
contacted because every stakeholder will be asked: “Whom else do you think I
should talk to?”
5.2.2
Recognizing Multiple Viewpoints
Because many different stakeholders exist, the requirements of the system will be
explored from many different points of view. For example, the marketing group is in-
terested in functions and features that will excite the potential market, making the
new system easy to sell. Business managers are interested in a feature set that can
be built within budget and that will be ready to meet defined market windows. End
users may want features that are familiar to them and that are easy to learn and use.
Software engineers may be concerned with functions that are invisible to nontech-
nical stakeholders but that enable an infrastructure that supports more marketable
functions and features. Support engineers may focus on the maintainability of the
software.
Each of these constituencies (and others) will contribute information to the re-
quirements engineering process. As information from multiple viewpoints is col-
lected, emerging requirements may be inconsistent or may conflict with one
another. You should categorize all stakeholder information (including inconsistent
and conflicting requirements) in a way that will allow decision makers to choose an
internally consistent set of requirements for the system.
5.2.3
Working toward Collaboration
If five stakeholders are involved in a software project, you may have five (or more)
different opinions about the proper set of requirements. Throughout earlier chapters,
I have noted that customers (and other stakeholders) must collaborate among them-
selves (avoiding petty turf battles) and with software engineering practitioners if a
successful system is to result. But how is this collaboration accomplished?
The job of a requirements engineer is to identify areas of commonality (i.e., re-
quirements on which all stakeholders agree) and areas of conflict or inconsistency
(i.e., requirements that are desired by one stakeholder but conflict with the
needs of another stakeholder). It is, of course, the latter category that presents a
challenge.
126
PART TWO
MODELING
uote:
“Put three
stakeholders in a
room and ask them
what kind of
system they want.
You’re likely to get
four or more
different opinions.”
Author unknown

Collaboration does not necessarily mean that requirements are defined by
committee. In many cases, stakeholders collaborate by providing their view of
requirements, but a strong “project champion”(e.g., a business manager or a senior
technologist) may make the final decision about which requirements make the cut.
5.2.4
Asking the First Questions
Questions asked at the inception of the project should be “context free” [Gau89]. The
first set of context-free questions focuses on the customer and other stakeholders,
the overall project goals and benefits. For example, you might ask:
• Who is behind the request for this work?
• Who will use the solution?
• What will be the economic benefit of a successful solution?
• Is there another source for the solution that you need?
These questions help to identify all stakeholders who will have interest in the
software to be built. In addition, the questions identify the measurable benefit of
a successful implementation and possible alternatives to custom software devel-
opment.
The next set of questions enables you to gain a better understanding of the prob-
lem and allows the customer to voice his or her perceptions about a solution:
• How would you characterize “good” output that would be generated by a
successful solution?
• What problem(s) will this solution address?
• Can you show me (or describe) the business environment in which the
solution will be used?
• Will special performance issues or constraints affect the way the solution is
approached?
CHAPTER 5
UNDERSTANDING REQUIREMENTS
127
INFO
uote:
“It is better to
know some of the
questions than all
of the answers.”
James Thurber
What
questions
will help you gain
a preliminary
understanding of
the problem?
?
Using “Priority Points”
One way of resolving conflicting
requirements and at the same time better
understanding the relative importance of all requirements
is to use a “voting” scheme based on priority points.
All stakeholders are provided with some number of
priority points that can be “spent” on any number of
requirements. A list of requirements is presented, and
each stakeholder indicates the relative importance of
each (from his or her viewpoint) by spending one or
more priority points on it. Points spent cannot be reused.
Once a stakeholder’s priority points are exhausted,
no further action on requirements can be taken by that
person. Overall points spent on each requirement by
all stakeholders provide an indication of the overall
importance of each requirement.

The final set of questions focuses on the effectiveness of the communication
activity itself. Gause and Weinberg [Gau89] call these “meta-questions” and propose
the following (abbreviated) list:
• Are you the right person to answer these questions? Are your answers
“official”?
• Are my questions relevant to the problem that you have?
• Am I asking too many questions?
• Can anyone else provide additional information?
• Should I be asking you anything else?
These questions (and others) will help to “break the ice” and initiate the communi-
cation that is essential to successful elicitation. But a question-and-answer meeting
format is not an approach that has been overwhelmingly successful. In fact, the Q&A
session should be used for the first encounter only and then replaced by a require-
ments elicitation format that combines elements of problem solving, negotiation,
and specification. An approach of this type is presented in Section 5.3.
5.3
ELICITING REQUIREMENTS
Requirements elicitation (also called requirements gathering) combines elements of
problem solving, elaboration, negotiation, and specification. In order to encourage
a collaborative, team-oriented approach to requirements gathering, stakeholders
work together to identify the problem, propose elements of the solution, negotiate
different approaches and specify a preliminary set of solution requirements [Zah90].9
5.3.1
Collaborative Requirements Gathering
Many different approaches to collaborative requirements gathering have been pro-
posed. Each makes use of a slightly different scenario, but all apply some variation
on the following basic guidelines:
• Meetings are conducted and attended by both software engineers and other
stakeholders.
• Rules for preparation and participation are established.
• An agenda is suggested that is formal enough to cover all important points
but informal enough to encourage the free flow of ideas.
• A “facilitator” (can be a customer, a developer, or an outsider) controls the
meeting.
• A “definition mechanism” (can be work sheets, flip charts, or wall stickers or
an electronic bulletin board, chat room, or virtual forum) is used.
128
PART TWO
MODELING
9
This approach is sometimes called a facilitated application specification technique (FAST).
uote:
“He who asks a
question is a fool
for five minutes;
he who does not
ask a question is a
fool forever.”
Chinese proverb
What are 
the basic
guidelines for
conducting a
collaborative
requirements
gathering
meeting?
?

The goal is to identify the problem, propose elements of the solution, negotiate
different approaches, and specify a preliminary set of solution requirements in an at-
mosphere that is conducive to the accomplishment of the goal. To better understand
the flow of events as they occur, I present a brief scenario that outlines the sequence
of events that lead up to the requirements gathering meeting, occur during the meet-
ing, and follow the meeting.
During inception (Section 5.2) basic questions and answers establish the scope of
the problem and the overall perception of a solution. Out of these initial meetings,
the developer and customers write a one- or two-page “product request.” 
A meeting place, time, and date are selected; a facilitator is chosen; and attendees
from the software team and other stakeholder organizations are invited to partici-
pate. The product request is distributed to all attendees before the meeting date.
As an example,10 consider an excerpt from a product request written by a mar-
keting person involved in the SafeHome project. This person writes the following nar-
rative about the home security function that is to be part of SafeHome:
Our research indicates that the market for home management systems is growing at a
rate of 40 percent per year. The first SafeHome function we bring to market should be the
home security function. Most people are familiar with “alarm systems” so this would be
an easy sell.
The home security function would protect against and/or recognize a variety of un-
desirable “situations” such as illegal entry, fire, flooding, carbon monoxide levels, and
others. It’ll use our wireless sensors to detect each situation. It can be programmed by the
homeowner, and will automatically telephone a monitoring agency when a situation is
detected.
In reality, others would contribute to this narrative during the requirements gath-
ering meeting and considerably more information would be available. But even with
additional information, ambiguity would be present, omissions would likely exist,
and errors might occur. For now, the preceding “functional description” will suffice.
While reviewing the product request in the days before the meeting, each at-
tendee is asked to make a list of objects that are part of the environment that sur-
rounds the system, other objects that are to be produced by the system, and objects
that are used by the system to perform its functions. In addition, each attendee is
asked to make another list of services (processes or functions) that manipulate or in-
teract with the objects. Finally, lists of constraints (e.g., cost, size, business rules) and
performance criteria (e.g., speed, accuracy) are also developed. The attendees are in-
formed that the lists are not expected to be exhaustive but are expected to reflect
each person’s perception of the system.
CHAPTER 5
UNDERSTANDING REQUIREMENTS
129
uote:
“We spend a lot of
time—the
majority of project
effort—not
implementing or
testing, but trying
to decide what to
build.”
Brian Lawrence
WebRef
Joint Application
Development (JAD) is
a popular technique 
for requirements
gathering. A good
description can be
found at
www.carolla.com/
wp-jad.htm.
If a system or product
will serve many users,
be absolutely certain
that requirements are
elicited from a repre-
sentative cross section
of users. If only one
user defines all require-
ments, acceptance risk
is high.
10 This example (with extensions and variations) is used to illustrate important software engineering
methods in many of the chapters that follow. As an exercise, it would be worthwhile to conduct
your own requirements gathering meeting and develop a set of lists for it.

Objects described for SafeHome might include the control panel, smoke detectors,
window and door sensors, motion detectors, an alarm, an event (a sensor has been
activated), a display, a PC, telephone numbers, a telephone call, and so on. The list
of services might include configuring the system, setting the alarm, monitoring the
sensors, dialing the phone, programming the control panel, and reading the display
(note that services act on objects). In a similar fashion, each attendee will develop
lists of constraints (e.g., the system must recognize when sensors are not operating,
must be user-friendly, must interface directly to a standard phone line) and perform-
ance criteria (e.g., a sensor event should be recognized within one second, and an
event priority scheme should be implemented).
The lists of objects can be pinned to the walls of the room using large sheets of
paper, stuck to the walls using adhesive-backed sheets, or written on a wall board.
Alternatively, the lists may have been posted on an electronic bulletin board, at an
internal website, or posed in a chat room environment for review prior to the meet-
ing. Ideally, each listed entry should be capable of being manipulated separately so
that lists can be combined, entries can be modified, and additions can be made. At
this stage, critique and debate are strictly prohibited.
After individual lists are presented in one topic area, the group creates a com-
bined list by eliminating redundant entries, adding any new ideas that come up dur-
ing the discussion, but not deleting anything. After you create combined lists for all
topic areas, discussion—coordinated by the facilitator—ensues. The combined list is
shortened, lengthened, or reworded to properly reflect the product/system to be de-
veloped. The objective is to develop a consensus list of objects, services, constraints,
and performance for the system to be built.
In many cases, an object or service described on a list will require further expla-
nation. To accomplish this, stakeholders develop mini-specifications for entries on
the lists.11 Each mini-specification is an elaboration of an object or service. For
example, the mini-spec for the SafeHome object Control Panel might be:
The control panel is a wall-mounted unit that is approximately 9  5 inches in size. The
control panel has wireless connectivity to sensors and a PC. User interaction occurs
through a keypad containing 12 keys. A 3  3 inch LCD color display provides user feed-
back. Software provides interactive prompts, echo, and similar functions.
The mini-specs are presented to all stakeholders for discussion. Additions, deletions,
and further elaboration are made. In some cases, the development of mini-specs will
uncover new objects, services, constraints, or performance requirements that will be
added to the original lists. During all discussions, the team may raise an issue that
cannot be resolved during the meeting. An issues list is maintained so that these
ideas will be acted on later.
130
PART TWO
MODELING
Avoid the impulse to
shoot down a cus-
tomer’s idea as “too
costly” or “impracti-
cal.” The idea here is
to negotiate a list that
is acceptable to all. To
do this, you must keep
an open mind.
11 Rather than creating a mini-specification, many software teams elect to develop user scenarios
called use cases. These are considered in detail in Section 5.4 and in Chapter 6.
uote:
“Facts do not cease
to exist because
they are ignored.”
Aldous Huxley

5.3.2
Quality Function Deployment
Quality function deployment (QFD) is a quality management technique that translates
the needs of the customer into technical requirements for software. QFD “concen-
trates on maximizing customer satisfaction from the software engineering process”
[Zul92]. To accomplish this, QFD emphasizes an understanding of what is valuable
to the customer and then deploys these values throughout the engineering process.
QFD identifies three types of requirements [Zul92]:
Normal requirements.
The objectives and goals that are stated for a prod-
uct or system during meetings with the customer. If these requirements are
present, the customer is satisfied. Examples of normal requirements might be
requested types of graphical displays, specific system functions, and defined
levels of performance.
Expected requirements.
These requirements are implicit to the product
or system and may be so fundamental that the customer does not explicitly
state them. Their absence will be a cause for significant dissatisfaction.
Examples of expected requirements are: ease of human/machine interaction,
overall operational correctness and reliability, and ease of software
installation.
CHAPTER 5
UNDERSTANDING REQUIREMENTS
131
The scene: A meeting room. The first
requirements gathering meeting is in progress.
The players: Jamie Lazar, software team member;
Vinod Raman, software team member; Ed Robbins,
software team member; Doug Miller, software
engineering manager; three members of marketing; a
product engineering representative; and a facilitator.
The conversation:
Facilitator (pointing at whiteboard): So that’s the
current list of objects and services for the home security
function.
Marketing person: That about covers it from our
point of view.
Vinod: Didn’t someone mention that they wanted all
SafeHome functionality to be accessible via the Internet?
That would include the home security function, no?
Marketing person: Yes, that’s right . . . we’ll have to
add that functionality and the appropriate objects.
Facilitator: Does that also add some constraints?
Jamie: It does, both technical and legal.
Production rep: Meaning?
Jamie: We better make sure an outsider can’t hack into
the system, disarm it, and rob the place or worse. Heavy
liability on our part.
Doug: Very true.
Marketing: But we still need that . . . just be sure to stop
an outsider from getting in.
Ed: That’s easier said than done and . . .
Facilitator (interrupting): I don’t want to debate this
issue now. Let’s note it as an action item and proceed.
(Doug, serving as the recorder for the meeting, makes an
appropriate note.)
Facilitator: I have a feeling there’s still more to consider
here.
(The group spends the next 20 minutes refining and
expanding the details of the home security function.)
SAFEHOME
QFD defines require-
ments in a way that
maximizes customer
satisfaction.
Everyone wants to
implement lots of
exciting requirements,
but be careful. That’s
how “requirements
creep” sets in. On the
other hand, exciting
requirements lead to a
breakthrough product!
Conducting a Requirements Gathering Meeting

Exciting requirements.
These features go beyond the customer’s expecta-
tions and prove to be very satisfying when present. For example, software for
a new mobile phone comes with standard features, but is coupled with a set
of unexpected capabilities (e.g., multitouch screen, visual voice mail) that
delight every user of the product.
Although QFD concepts can be applied across the entire software process [Par96a],
specific QFD techniques are applicable to the requirements elicitation activity. QFD
uses customer interviews and observation, surveys, and examination of historical
data (e.g., problem reports) as raw data for the requirements gathering activity.
These data are then translated into a table of requirements—called the customer
voice table—that is reviewed with the customer and other stakeholders. A variety of
diagrams, matrices, and evaluation methods are then used to extract expected re-
quirements and to attempt to derive exciting requirements [Aka04].
5.3.3
Usage Scenarios
As requirements are gathered, an overall vision of system functions and features be-
gins to materialize. However, it is difficult to move into more technical software en-
gineering activities until you understand how these functions and features will be
used by different classes of end users. To accomplish this, developers and users can
create a set of scenarios that identify a thread of usage for the system to be con-
structed. The scenarios, often called use cases [Jac92], provide a description of how
the system will be used. Use cases are discussed in greater detail in Section 5.4.
132
PART TWO
MODELING
WebRef
Useful information on
QFD can be obtained at
www.qfdi.org.
The scene: A meeting room,
continuing the first requirements gathering meeting.
The players: Jamie Lazar, software team member;
Vinod Raman, software team member; Ed Robbins,
software team member; Doug Miller, software
engineering manager; three members of marketing; a
product engineering representative; and a facilitator.
The conversation:
Facilitator: We’ve been talking about security for
access to SafeHome functionality that will be accessible
via the Internet. I’d like to try something. Let’s develop a
usage scenario for access to the home security function.
Jamie: How?
Facilitator: We can do it a couple of different ways, but
for now, I’d like to keep things really informal. Tell us (he
points at a marketing person) how you envision accessing
the system.
Marketing person: Um . . . well, this is the kind of
thing I’d do if I was away from home and I had to let
someone into the house, say a housekeeper or repair guy,
who didn’t have the security code.
Facilitator (smiling): That’s the reason you’d do it . . .
tell me how you’d actually do this.
Marketing person: Um . . . the first thing I’d need is a
PC. I’d log on to a website we’d maintain for all users of
SafeHome. I’d provide my user id and . . .
Vinod (interrupting): The Web page would have to be
secure, encrypted, to guarantee that we’re safe and . . .
Facilitator (interrupting): That’s good information,
Vinod, but it’s technical. Let’s just focus on how the end
user will use this capability. OK?
Vinod: No problem.
Marketing person: So as I was saying, I’d log on to a
website and provide my user ID and two levels of passwords.
SAFEHOME
Developing a Preliminary User Scenario

5.3.4
Elicitation Work Products
The work products produced as a consequence of requirements elicitation will vary
depending on the size of the system or product to be built. For most systems, the
work products include
• A statement of need and feasibility.
• A bounded statement of scope for the system or product.
• A list of customers, users, and other stakeholders who participated in
requirements elicitation.
• A description of the system’s technical environment.
• A list of requirements (preferably organized by function) and the domain
constraints that apply to each.
• A set of usage scenarios that provide insight into the use of the system or
product under different operating conditions.
• Any prototypes developed to better define requirements.
Each of these work products is reviewed by all people who have participated in re-
quirements elicitation.
5.4
DEVELOPING USE CASES
In a book that discusses how to write effective use cases, Alistair Cockburn
[Coc01b] notes that “a use case captures a contract ... [that] describes the system’s
behavior under various conditions as the system responds to a request from one of
its stakeholders . . .” In essence, a use case tells a stylized story about how an end
user (playing one of a number of possible roles) interacts with the system under a
specific set of circumstances. The story may be narrative text, an outline of tasks
or interactions, a template-based description, or a diagrammatic representation.
Regardless of its form, a use case depicts the software or system from the end
user’s point of view.
CHAPTER 5
UNDERSTANDING REQUIREMENTS
133
Jamie: What if I forget my password?
Facilitator (interrupting): Good point, Jamie, but
let’s not address that now. We’ll make a note of that and
call it an exception. I’m sure there’ll be others.
Marketing person: After I enter the passwords, a
screen representing all SafeHome functions will appear.
I’d select the home security function. The system might
request that I verify who I am, say, by asking for my
address or phone number or something. It would then
display a picture of the security system control panel
along with a list of functions that I can perform—arm the
system, disarm the system, disarm one or more sensors.
I suppose it might also allow me to reconfigure security
zones and other things like that, but I’m not sure.
(As the marketing person continues talking, Doug takes
copious notes; these form the basis for the first informal
usage scenario. Alternatively, the marketing person could
have been asked to write the scenario, but this would be
done outside the meeting.)
What
information
is produced as a
consequence of
requirements
gathering?
?

The first step in writing a use case is to define the set of “actors” that will be
involved in the story. Actors are the different people (or devices) that use the system
or product within the context of the function and behavior that is to be described.
Actors represent the roles that people (or devices) play as the system operates.
Defined somewhat more formally, an actor is anything that communicates with the
system or product and that is external to the system itself. Every actor has one or
more goals when using the system.
It is important to note that an actor and an end user are not necessarily the same
thing. A typical user may play a number of different roles when using a system,
whereas an actor represents a class of external entities (often, but not always, peo-
ple) that play just one role in the context of the use case. As an example, consider a
machine operator (a user) who interacts with the control computer for a manufac-
turing cell that contains a number of robots and numerically controlled machines.
After careful review of requirements, the software for the control computer requires
four different modes (roles) for interaction: programming mode, test mode, moni-
toring mode, and troubleshooting mode. Therefore, four actors can be defined: pro-
grammer, tester, monitor, and troubleshooter. In some cases, the machine operator
can play all of these roles. In others, different people may play the role of each actor.
Because requirements elicitation is an evolutionary activity, not all actors are
identified during the first iteration. It is possible to identify primary actors [Jac92]
during the first iteration and secondary actors as more is learned about the system.
Primary actors interact to achieve required system function and derive the intended
benefit from the system. They work directly and frequently with the software.
Secondary actors support the system so that primary actors can do their work.
Once actors have been identified, use cases can be developed. Jacobson [Jac92]
suggests a number of questions12 that should be answered by a use case:
• Who is the primary actor, the secondary actor(s)?
• What are the actor’s goals?
• What preconditions should exist before the story begins?
• What main tasks or functions are performed by the actor?
• What exceptions might be considered as the story is described?
• What variations in the actor’s interaction are possible?
• What system information will the actor acquire, produce, or change?
• Will the actor have to inform the system about changes in the external
environment?
• What information does the actor desire from the system?
• Does the actor wish to be informed about unexpected changes?
134
PART TWO
MODELING
Use cases are defined
from an actor’s point
of view. An actor is
a role that people
(users) or devices play
as they interact with
the software.
WebRef
An excellent paper on
use cases can be
downloaded from
www.ibm.com/
developerworks/
webservices/
library/
codesign7.html.
What do I
need to
know in order to
develop an
effective use
case?
?
12 Jacobson’s questions have been extended to provide a more complete view of use-case content.

Recalling basic SafeHome requirements, we define four actors: homeowner
(a user), setup manager (likely the same person as homeowner, but playing a dif-
ferent role), sensors (devices attached to the system), and the monitoring and
response subsystem (the central station that monitors the SafeHome home secu-
rity function). For the purposes of this example, we consider only the homeowner
actor. The homeowner actor interacts with the home security function in a number
of different ways using either the alarm control panel or a PC:
• Enters a password to allow all other interactions.
• Inquires about the status of a security zone.
• Inquires about the status of a sensor.
• Presses the panic button in an emergency.
• Activates/deactivates the security system.
Considering the situation in which the homeowner uses the control panel, the basic
use case for system activation follows:13
1. The homeowner observes the SafeHome control panel (Figure 5.1) to determine if the
system is ready for input. If the system is not ready, a not ready message is displayed
on the LCD display, and the homeowner must physically close windows or doors so
that the not ready message disappears. [A not ready message implies that a sensor is
open; i.e., that a door or window is open.]
CHAPTER 5
UNDERSTANDING REQUIREMENTS
135
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
*
0
off
SAFEHOME
away
stay
max
test
bypass
instant
code
chime
ready
#
armed
power
alarm
check
fire
away
stay
instant
bypass
not ready
panic
FIGURE 5.1
SafeHome
control panel
13 Note that this use case differs from the situation in which the system is accessed via the Internet.
In this case, interaction occurs via the control panel, not the graphical user interface (GUI) provided
when a PC is used.

2. The homeowner uses the keypad to key in a four-digit password. The password is com-
pared with the valid password stored in the system. If the password is incorrect, the con-
trol panel will beep once and reset itself for additional input. If the password is correct,
the control panel awaits further action.
3. The homeowner selects and keys in stay or away (see Figure 5.1) to activate the system.
Stay activates only perimeter sensors (inside motion detecting sensors are deacti-
vated). Away activates all sensors.
4. When activation occurs, a red alarm light can be observed by the homeowner.
The basic use case presents a high-level story that describes the interaction between
the actor and the system.
In many instances, uses cases are further elaborated to provide considerably
more detail about the interaction. For example, Cockburn [Coc01b] suggests the fol-
lowing template for detailed descriptions of use cases:
Use case:
InitiateMonitoring
Primary actor:
Homeowner.
Goal in context:
To set the system to monitor sensors when the homeowner
leaves the house or remains inside.
Preconditions:
System has been programmed for a password and to recognize
various sensors.
Trigger:
The homeowner decides to “set” the system, i.e., to turn on the
alarm functions.
Scenario:
1. Homeowner: observes control panel
2. Homeowner: enters password
3. Homeowner: selects “stay” or “away”
4. Homeowner: observes read alarm light to indicate that SafeHome has been armed
Exceptions:
1. Control panel is not ready: homeowner checks all sensors to determine which are
open; closes them.
2. Password is incorrect (control panel beeps once): homeowner reenters correct password.
3. Password not recognized: monitoring and response subsystem must be contacted to
reprogram password.
4. Stay is selected: control panel beeps twice and a stay light is lit; perimeter sensors are
activated.
5. Away is selected: control panel beeps three times and an away light is lit; all sensors
are activated.
Priority:
Essential, must be implemented
When available:
First increment
136
PART TWO
MODELING
Use cases are often
written informally.
However, use the tem-
plate shown here to
ensure that you’ve
addressed all key
issues.

Frequency of use:
Many times per day
Channel to actor:
Via control panel interface
Secondary actors:
Support technician, sensors
Channels to secondary actors:
Support technician: phone line
Sensors: hardwired and radio frequency interfaces
Open issues:
1. Should there be a way to activate the system without the use of a password or with an
abbreviated password?
2. Should the control panel display additional text messages?
3. How much time does the homeowner have to enter the password from the time the
first key is pressed?
4. Is there a way to deactivate the system before it actually activates?
Use cases for other homeowner interactions would be developed in a similar manner.
It is important to review each use case with care. If some element of the interaction
is ambiguous, it is likely that a review of the use case will indicate a problem.
CHAPTER 5
UNDERSTANDING REQUIREMENTS
137
The scene: A meeting room,
continuing the requirements gathering meeting
The players: Jamie Lazar, software team member;
Vinod Raman, software team member; Ed Robbins,
software team member; Doug Miller, software
engineering manager; three members of marketing; a
product engineering representative; and a facilitator.
The conversation:
Facilitator: We’ve spent a fair amount of time talking
about SafeHome home security functionality. During the
break I sketched a use case diagram to summarize the
important scenarios that are part of this function. Take
a look.
(All attendees look at Figure 5.2.)
Jamie: I’m just beginning to learn UML notation.14 So
the home security function is represented by the big box
with the ovals inside it? And the ovals represent use cases
that we’ve written in text?
Facilitator: Yep. And the stick figures represent actors—
the people or things that interact with the system as described
by the use case . . . oh, I use the labeled square to represent
an actor that’s not a person . . . in this case, sensors.
Doug: Is that legal in UML?
Facilitator: Legality isn’t the issue. The point is to
communicate information. I view the use of a humanlike
stick figure for representing a device to be misleading. So
I’ve adapted things a bit. I don’t think it creates a problem.
Vinod: Okay, so we have use-case narratives for each
of the ovals. Do we need to develop the more detailed
template-based narratives I’ve read about?
Facilitator: Probably, but that can wait until we’ve
considered other SafeHome functions.
Marketing person: Wait, I’ve been looking at this
diagram and all of a sudden I realize we missed something.
Facilitator: Oh really. Tell me what we’ve missed.
(The meeting continues.)
SAFEHOME
14 A brief UML tutorial is presented in Appendix 1 for those who are unfamiliar with the notation.
Developing a High-Level Use-Case Diagram

138
PART TWO
MODELING
15 Tools noted here do not represent an endorsement, but rather a sampling of tools in this category.
In most cases, tool names are trademarked by their respective developers.
16 Throughout this book, I use the terms analysis model and requirements model synonymously. Both
refer to representations of the information, functional, and behavioral domains that describe prob-
lem requirements.
Use-Case Development
Objective: Assist in the development of
use cases by providing automated templates
and mechanisms for assessing clarity and consistency.
Mechanics: Tool mechanics vary. In general, use-case
tools provide fill-in-the-blank templates for creating effective
use cases. Most use-case functionality is embedded into a
set of broader requirements engineering functions.
Representative Tools:15
The vast majority of UML-based analysis modeling tools
provide both text and graphical support for use-case
development and modeling.
Objects by Design
(www.objectsbydesign.com/tools/
umltools_byCompany.html) provides
comprehensive links to tools of this type.
SOFTWARE TOOLS
5.5
BUILDING THE REQUIREMENTS MODEL 1 6
The intent of the analysis model is to provide a description of the required informational,
functional, and behavioral domains for a computer-based system. The model changes
dynamically as you learn more about the system to be built, and other stakeholders un-
derstand more about what they really require. For that reason, the analysis model is a
snapshot of requirements at any given time. You should expect it to change.
Homeowner
System 
administrator
Arms/disarms
system
Responds to 
alarm event
Accesses
system
via Internet
Encounters
an error
condition
Reconfigures
sensors and
related 
system features
Sensors
FIGURE 5.2
UML use case
diagram for
SafeHome
home security
function

As the requirements model evolves, certain elements will become relatively
stable, providing a solid foundation for the design tasks that follow. However, other
elements of the model may be more volatile, indicating that stakeholders do not yet
fully understand requirements for the system. The analysis model and the methods
that are used to build it are presented in detail in Chapters 6 and 7. I present a brief
overview in the sections that follow.
5.5.1
Elements of the Requirements Model
There are many different ways to look at the requirements for a computer-based
system. Some software people argue that it’s best to select one mode of represen-
tation (e.g., the use case) and apply it to the exclusion of all other modes. Other
practitioners believe that it’s worthwhile to use a number of different modes of rep-
resentation to depict the requirements model. Different modes of representation
force you to consider requirements from different viewpoints—an approach that has
a higher probability of uncovering omissions, inconsistencies, and ambiguity.
The specific elements of the requirements model are dictated by the analysis
modeling method (Chapters 6 and 7) that is to be used. However, a set of generic
elements is common to most requirements models.
Scenario-based elements.
The system is described from the user’s point of view
using a scenario-based approach. For example, basic use cases (Section 5.4) and
their corresponding use-case diagrams (Figure 5.2) evolve into more elaborate
template-based use cases. Scenario-based elements of the requirements model
are often the first part of the model that is developed. As such, they serve as input for
the creation of other modeling elements. Figure 5.3 depicts a UML activity diagram17
for eliciting requirements and representing them using use cases. Three levels of
elaboration are shown, culminating in a scenario-based representation.
Class-based elements.
Each usage scenario implies a set of objects that are
manipulated as an actor interacts with the system. These objects are categorized into
classes—a collection of things that have similar attributes and common behaviors. For
example, a UML class diagram can be used to depict a Sensor class for the SafeHome
security function (Figure 5.4). Note that the diagram lists the attributes of sensors (e.g.,
name, type) and the operations (e.g., identify, enable) that can be applied to modify
these attributes. In addition to class diagrams, other analysis modeling elements de-
pict the manner in which classes collaborate with one another and the relationships
and interactions between classes. These are discussed in more detail in Chapter 7.
Behavioral elements.
The behavior of a computer-based system can have a pro-
found effect on the design that is chosen and the implementation approach that is
applied. Therefore, the requirements model must provide modeling elements that
depict behavior.
CHAPTER 5
UNDERSTANDING REQUIREMENTS
139
17 A brief UML tutorial is presented in Appendix 1 for those who are unfamiliar with the notation.
It is always a good
idea to get stakehold-
ers involved. One of
the best ways to do
this is to have each
stakeholder write use
cases that describe
how the software will
be used.
One way to isolate
classes is to look for
descriptive nouns in a
use-case script. At least
some of the nouns will
be candidate classes.
More on this in the
Chapter 8.

140
PART TWO
MODELING
Formal prioritization?
Yes
No
Conduct
meetings
Make lists of 
functions, classes
Make lists of 
constraints, etc.
  
Use QFD to
prioritize 
requirements
Informally
prioritize 
requirements
Create
use cases
Draw use-case
diagram
Define
actors
Write
scenario
Complete
template
Elicit requirements
FIGURE 5.3
UML activity
diagrams for
eliciting
requirements
Name
Type
Location
Area
Characteristics
Identify()
Enable()
Disable()
Reconfigure()
Sensor
FIGURE 5.4
Class diagram
for sensor
A state is an externally
observable mode of
behavior. External
stimuli cause transi-
tions between states.
The state diagram is one method for representing the behavior of a system by de-
picting its states and the events that cause the system to change state. A state is any
externally observable mode of behavior. In addition, the state diagram indicates
actions (e.g., process activation) taken as a consequence of a particular event.
To illustrate the use of a state diagram, consider software embedded within the
SafeHome control panel that is responsible for reading user input. A simplified UML
state diagram is shown in Figure 5.5.

Flow-oriented elements. Information is transformed as it flows through a
computer-based system. The system accepts input in a variety of forms, applies func-
tions to transform it, and produces output in a variety of forms. Input may be a control
signal transmitted by a transducer, a series of numbers typed by a human operator, a
CHAPTER 5
UNDERSTANDING REQUIREMENTS
141
The scene: A meeting room,
continuing the requirements meeting.
The players: Jamie Lazar, software team member;
Vinod Raman, software team member; Ed Robbins,
software team member; Doug Miller, software
engineering manager; three members of marketing;
a product engineering representative; and a facilitator.
The conversation:
Facilitator: We’ve just about finished talking about
SafeHome home security functionality. But before we do,
I want to discuss the behavior of the function.
Marketing person: I don’t understand what you mean
by behavior.
Ed (smiling): That’s when you give the product a
“timeout” if it misbehaves.
Facilitator: Not exactly. Let me explain.
(The facilitator explains the basics of behavioral modeling
to the requirements gathering team.)
Marketing person: This seems a little technical. I’m
not sure I can help here.
Facilitator: Sure you can. What behavior do you
observe from the user’s point of view?
Marketing person: Uh . . . well, the system will be
monitoring the sensors. It’ll be reading commands from
the homeowner. It’ll be displaying its status.
Facilitator: See, you can do it.
Jamie: It’ll also be polling the PC to determine if there is
any input from it, for example, Internet-based access or
configuration information.
Vinod: Yeah, in fact, configuring the system is a state in
its own right.
Doug: You guys are rolling. Let’s give this a bit more
thought . . . is there a way to diagram this stuff?
Facilitator: There is, but let’s postpone that until after
the meeting.
SAFEHOME
System status = "Ready"
Display msg = "enter cmd"
Display status = steady
State name
State variables
State activities
Entry/subsystems ready
Do: poll user input panel
Do: read user input
Do: interpret user input
Reading
commands
FIGURE 5.5
UML state
diagram
notation
In addition to behavioral representations of the system as a whole, the behavior
of individual classes can also be modeled. Further discussion of behavioral model-
ing is presented in Chapter 7.
Preliminary Behavioral Modeling

packet of information transmitted on a network link, or a voluminous data file
retrieved from secondary storage. The transform(s) may comprise a single logical
comparison, a complex numerical algorithm, or a rule-inference approach of an expert
system. Output may light a single LED or produce a 200-page report. In effect, we can
create a flow model for any computer-based system, regardless of size and complex-
ity. A more detailed discussion of flow modeling is presented in Chapter 7.
5.5.2
Analysis Patterns
Anyone who has done requirements engineering on more than a few software
projects begins to notice that certain problems reoccur across all projects within a
specific application domain.18 These analysis patterns [Fow97] suggest solutions
(e.g., a class, a function, a behavior) within the application domain that can be
reused when modeling many applications.
Geyer-Schulz and Hahsler [Gey01] suggest two benefits that can be associated
with the use of analysis patterns:
First, analysis patterns speed up the development of abstract analysis models that cap-
ture the main requirements of the concrete problem by providing reusable analysis mod-
els with examples as well as a description of advantages and limitations. Second, analysis
patterns facilitate the transformation of the analysis model into a design model by sug-
gesting design patterns and reliable solutions for common problems.
Analysis patterns are integrated into the analysis model by reference to the pattern
name. They are also stored in a repository so that requirements engineers can use
search facilities to find and apply them. Information about an analysis pattern (and
other types of patterns) is presented in a standard template [Gey01]19 that is dis-
cussed in more detail in Chapter 12. Examples of analysis patterns and further dis-
cussion of this topic are presented in Chapter 7.
5.6
NEGOTIATING REQUIREMENTS
In an ideal requirements engineering context, the inception, elicitation, and elabo-
ration tasks determine customer requirements in sufficient detail to proceed to sub-
sequent software engineering activities. Unfortunately, this rarely happens. In reality,
you may have to enter into a negotiation with one or more stakeholders. In most
cases, stakeholders are asked to balance functionality, performance, and other prod-
uct or system characteristics against cost and time-to-market. The intent of this
negotiation is to develop a project plan that meets stakeholder needs while at the
142
PART TWO
MODELING
18 In some cases, problems reoccur regardless of the application domain. For example, the features
and functions used to solve user interface problems are common regardless of the application
domain under consideration.
19 A variety of patterns templates have been proposed in the literature. If you have interest, see
[Fow97], [Gam95], [Yac03], and [Bus07] among many sources.
uote:
“A compromise is
the art of dividing
a cake in such a
way that everyone
believes he has the
biggest piece.”
Ludwig Erhard

same time reflecting the real-world constraints (e.g., time, people, budget) that have
been placed on the software team.
The best negotiations strive for a “win-win” result.20 That is, stakeholders win by
getting the system or product that satisfies the majority of their needs and you (as a
member of the software team) win by working to realistic and achievable budgets
and deadlines.
Boehm [Boe98] defines a set of negotiation activities at the beginning of each soft-
ware process iteration. Rather than a single customer communication activity, the
following activities are defined:
1.
Identification of the system or subsystem’s key stakeholders.
2.
Determination of the stakeholders’ “win conditions.”
3.
Negotiation of the stakeholders’ win conditions to reconcile them into a set
of win-win conditions for all concerned (including the software team).
Successful completion of these initial steps achieves a win-win result, which becomes
the key criterion for proceeding to subsequent software engineering activities.
CHAPTER 5
UNDERSTANDING REQUIREMENTS
143
20 Dozens of books have been written on negotiating skills (e.g., [Lew06], [Rai06], [Fis06]). It is one of
the more important skills that you can learn. Read one.
WebRef
A brief paper on
negotiation for software
requirements can be
downloaded from
www.alexander-
egyed.com/
publications/
Software_
Requirements_
Negotiation-
Some_Lessons_
Learned.html.
The Art of Negotiation
Learning how to negotiate effectively can serve
you well throughout your personal and technical
life. The following guidelines are well worth considering:
1.
Recognize that it’s not a competition. To be
successful, both parties have to feel they’ve won or
achieved something. Both will have to compromise.
2.
Map out a strategy. Decide what you’d like to
achieve; what the other party wants to achieve, and
how you’ll go about making both happen.
3.
Listen actively. Don’t work on formulating your
response while the other party is talking. Listen
to her. It’s likely you’ll gain knowledge that will help
you to better negotiate your position.
4.
Focus on the other party’s interests. Don’t take hard
positions if you want to avoid conflict.
5.
Don’t let it get personal. Focus on the problem that
needs to be solved.
6.
Be creative. Don’t be afraid to think out of the box if
you’re at an impasse.
7.
Be ready to commit. Once an agreement has been
reached, don’t waffle; commit to it and move on.
INFO
The Start of a Negotiation
The scene: Lisa Perez’s office, after
the first requirements gathering meeting.
The players: Doug Miller, software engineering
manager and Lisa Perez, marketing manager.
The conversation:
Lisa: So, I hear the first meeting went really well.
Doug: Actually, it did. You sent some good people to the
meeting . . . they really contributed.
SAFEHOME

5.7
VALIDATING REQUIREMENTS
144
PART TWO
MODELING
When I
review
requirements,
what questions
should I ask?
?
As each element of the requirements model is created, it is examined for inconsis-
tency, omissions, and ambiguity. The requirements represented by the model are pri-
oritized by the stakeholders and grouped within requirements packages that will be
implemented as software increments. A review of the requirements model addresses
the following questions:
• Is each requirement consistent with the overall objectives for the
system/product?
• Have all requirements been specified at the proper level of abstraction? That
is, do some requirements provide a level of technical detail that is inappro-
priate at this stage?
• Is the requirement really necessary or does it represent an add-on feature
that may not be essential to the objective of the system?
• Is each requirement bounded and unambiguous?
• Does each requirement have attribution? That is, is a source (generally, a
specific individual) noted for each requirement?
• Do any requirements conflict with other requirements?
• Is each requirement achievable in the technical environment that will house
the system or product?
• Is each requirement testable, once implemented?
• Does the requirements model properly reflect the information, function, and
behavior of the system to be built?
Lisa (smiling): Yeah, they actually told me they got into
it and it wasn’t a “propeller head activity.”
Doug (laughing): I’ll be sure to take off my techie
beanie the next time I visit . . . Look, Lisa, I think we may
have a problem with getting all of the functionality for the
home security system out by the dates your management
is talking about. It’s early, I know, but I’ve already been
doing a little back-of-the-envelope planning and . . .
Lisa (frowning): We’ve got to have it by that date,
Doug. What functionality are you talking about?
Doug: I figure we can get full home security functionality
out by the drop-dead date, but we’ll have to delay
Internet access ‘til the second release.
Lisa: Doug, it’s the Internet access that gives SafeHome
“gee whiz” appeal. We’re going to build our entire
marketing campaign around it. We’ve gotta have it!
Doug: I understand your situation, I really do. The
problem is that in order to give you Internet access,
we’ll have to have a fully secure website up and
running. That takes time and people. We’ll also have
to build a lot of additional functionality into the first
release . . . I don’t think we can do it with the resources
we’ve got.
Lisa (still frowning): I see, but you’ve got to figure out
a way to get it done. It’s pivotal to home security functions
and to other functions as well . . . those can wait until the
next releases . . . I’ll agree to that.
Lisa and Doug appear to be at an impasse, and yet they
must negotiate a solution to this problem. Can they both
“win” here? Playing the role of a mediator, what would you
suggest?

• Has the requirements model been “partitioned” in a way that exposes
progressively more detailed information about the system?
• Have requirements patterns been used to simplify the requirements model?
Have all patterns been properly validated? Are all patterns consistent with
customer requirements?
These and other questions should be asked and answered to ensure that the re-
quirements model is an accurate reflection of stakeholder needs and that it provides
a solid foundation for design.
5.8
SUMMARY
Requirements engineering tasks are conducted to establish a solid foundation for de-
sign and construction. Requirements engineering occurs during the communication
and modeling activities that have been defined for the generic software process.
Seven distinct requirements engineering functions—inception, elicitation, elabora-
tion, negotiation, specification, validation, and management—are conducted by
members of the software team.
At project inception, stakeholders establish basic problem requirements, define
overriding project constraints, and address major features and functions that must
be present for the system to meet its objectives. This information is refined and ex-
panded during elicitation—a requirements gathering activity that makes use of facil-
itated meetings, QFD, and the development of usage scenarios.
Elaboration further expands requirements in a model—a collection of scenario-
based, class-based, behavioral, and flow-oriented elements. The model may refer-
ence analysis patterns, solutions for analysis problems that have been seen to
reoccur across different applications.
As requirements are identified and the requirements model is being created, the
software team and other project stakeholders negotiate the priority, availability, and
relative cost of each requirement. The intent of this negotiation is to develop a realis-
tic project plan. In addition, each requirement and the requirements model as a whole
are validated against customer need to ensure that the right system is to be built.
PROBLEMS AND POINTS TO PONDER
5.1. Why is it that many software developers don’t pay enough attention to requirements engi-
neering? Are there ever circumstances where you can skip it?
5.2. You have been given the responsibility to elicit requirements from a customer who tells
you he is too busy to meet with you. What should you do?
5.3. Discuss some of the problems that occur when requirements must be elicited from three
or four different customers.
5.4. Why do we say that the requirements model represents a snapshot of a system in time?
CHAPTER 5
UNDERSTANDING REQUIREMENTS
145

Target Document [software requirements specification]. Problems of size must be dealt
with using an effective method of partitioning. The Victorian novel specification is
out. Graphics have to be used whenever possible. We have to differentiate between log-
ical [essential] and physical [implementation] considerations. . . . At the very least, we
need. . . . Something to help us partition our requirements and document that partition-
ing before specification. . . . Some means of keeping track of and evaluating interfaces. . . .
New tools to describe logic and policy, something better than narrative text.
Although DeMarco wrote about the attributes of analysis modeling more than a
quarter century ago, his comments still apply to modern requirements modeling
methods and notation.
6.1
REQUIREMENTS ANALYSIS
Requirements analysis results in the specification of software’s operational charac-
teristics, indicates software’s interface with other system elements, and establishes
constraints that software must meet. Requirements analysis allows you (regardless
of whether you’re called a software engineer, an analyst, or a modeler) to elaborate on
basic requirements established during the inception, elicitation, and negotiation
tasks that are part of requirements engineering (Chapter 5).
The requirements modeling action results in one or more of the following types
of models:
• Scenario-based models of requirements from the point of view of various
system “actors”
• Data models that depict the information domain for the problem
• Class-oriented models that represent object-oriented classes (attributes and
operations) and the manner in which classes collaborate to achieve system
requirements
• Flow-oriented models that represent the functional elements of the system
and how they transform data as it moves through the system
• Behavioral models that depict how the software behaves as a consequence of
external “events”
These models provide a software designer with information that can be translated
to architectural, interface, and component-level designs. Finally, the requirements
model (and the software requirements specification) provides the developer and the
customer with the means to assess quality once software is built.
In this chapter, I focus on scenario-based modeling—a technique that is growing
increasingly popular throughout the software engineering community; data
modeling—a more specialized technique that is particularly appropriate when an
application must create or manipulate a complex information space; and class
CHAPTER 6
REQUIREMENTS MODELING: SCENARIOS, INFORMATION, AND ANALYSIS CLASSES 149
requirements
modeling . . . . . .153
scenario-based
modeling . . . . . .154
swimlane
diagram . . . . . . .162
UML models . . . .161
use cases . . . . . .156
uote:
“Any one ‘view’
of requirements
is insufficient
to understand
or describe the
desired behavior of
a complex system.”
Alan M. Davis
The analysis model
and requirements
specification provide
a means for assessing
quality once the
software is built.

150
PART TWO
MODELING
modeling—a representation of the object-oriented classes and the resultant collabo-
rations that allow a system to function. Flow-oriented models, behavioral models,
pattern-based modeling, and WebApp models are discussed in Chapter 7.
6.1.1
Overall Objectives and Philosophy
Throughout requirements modeling, your primary focus is on what, not how. What
user interaction occurs in a particular circumstance, what objects does the system
manipulate, what functions must the system perform, what behaviors does the sys-
tem exhibit, what interfaces are defined, and what constraints apply?2
In earlier chapters, I noted that complete specification of requirements may not
be possible at this stage. The customer may be unsure of precisely what is required
for certain aspects of the system. The developer may be unsure that a specific ap-
proach will properly accomplish function and performance. These realities mitigate
in favor of an iterative approach to requirements analysis and modeling. The analyst
should model what is known and use that model as the basis for design of the soft-
ware increment.3
The requirements model must achieve three primary objectives: (1) to describe
what the customer requires, (2) to establish a basis for the creation of a software de-
sign, and (3) to define a set of requirements that can be validated once the software
is built. The analysis model bridges the gap between a system-level description that
describes overall system or business functionality as it is achieved by applying soft-
ware, hardware, data, human, and other system elements and a software design
(Chapters 8 through 13) that describes the software’s application architecture, user in-
terface, and component-level structure. This relationship is illustrated in Figure 6.1.
uote:
“Requirements are
not architecture.
Requirements
are not design, nor
are they the
user interface.
Requirements are
need.”
Andrew Hunt
and David
Thomas
2
It should be noted that as customers become more technologically sophisticated, there is a trend
toward the specification of how as well as what. However, the primary focus should remain on
what.
3
Alternatively, the software team may choose to create a prototype (Chapter 2) in an effort to better
understand requirements for the system.
The analysis model
should describe what
the customer wants,
establish a basis for
design, and establish a
target for validation.
System
description
Analysis
model
Design
model
FIGURE 6.1
The
requirements
model as
a bridge
between the
system
description
and the design
model

It is important to note that all elements of the requirements model will be directly
traceable to parts of the design model. A clear division of analysis and design tasks
between these two important modeling activities is not always possible. Some
design invariably occurs as part of analysis, and some analysis will be conducted
during design.
6.1.2
Analysis Rules of Thumb
Arlow and Neustadt [Arl02] suggest a number of worthwhile rules of thumb that
should be followed when creating the analysis model:
• The model should focus on requirements that are visible within the problem or
business domain. The level of abstraction should be relatively high. “Don’t get
bogged down in details” [Arl02] that try to explain how the system will work.
• Each element of the requirements model should add to an overall understanding
of software requirements and provide insight into the information domain,
function, and behavior of the system.
• Delay consideration of infrastructure and other nonfunctional models until
design. That is, a database may be required, but the classes necessary to
implement it, the functions required to access it, and the behavior that will be
exhibited as it is used should be considered only after problem domain
analysis has been completed.
• Minimize coupling throughout the system. It is important to represent relation-
ships between classes and functions. However, if the level of “interconnect-
edness” is extremely high, effort should be made to reduce it.
• Be certain that the requirements model provides value to all stakeholders. Each
constituency has its own use for the model. For example, business stake-
holders should use the model to validate requirements; designers should use
the model as a basis for design; QA people should use the model to help plan
acceptance tests.
• Keep the model as simple as it can be. Don’t create additional diagrams when
they add no new information. Don’t use complex notational forms, when a
simple list will do.
6.1.3
Domain Analysis
In the discussion of requirements engineering (Chapter 5), I noted that analysis pat-
terns often reoccur across many applications within a specific business domain. If
these patterns are defined and categorized in a manner that allows you to recognize
and apply them to solve common problems, the creation of the analysis model is
expedited. More important, the likelihood of applying design patterns and executa-
ble software components grows dramatically. This improves time-to-market and
reduces development costs.
CHAPTER 6
REQUIREMENTS MODELING: SCENARIOS, INFORMATION, AND ANALYSIS CLASSES 151
uote:
“Problems worthy
of attack, prove
their worth by
hitting back.”
Piet Hein
WebRef
Many useful resources
for domain analysis 
can be found at
www.iturls
.com/English/
Software
Engineering/
SE_mod5.asp.
Are there
basic 
guidelines that
can help us as we
do requirements
analysis work?
?

152
PART TWO
MODELING
But how are analysis patterns and classes recognized in the first place? Who de-
fines them, categorizes them, and readies them for use on subsequent projects? The
answers to these questions lie in domain analysis. Firesmith [Fir93] describes domain
analysis in the following way:
Software domain analysis is the identification, analysis, and specification of common re-
quirements from a specific application domain, typically for reuse on multiple projects
within that application domain. . . . [Object-oriented domain analysis is] the identification,
analysis, and specification of common, reusable capabilities within a specific application
domain, in terms of common objects, classes, subassemblies, and frameworks.
The “specific application domain” can range from avionics to banking, from multi-
media video games to software embedded within medical devices. The goal of do-
main analysis is straightforward: to find or create those analysis classes and/or
analysis patterns that are broadly applicable so that they may be reused.4
Using terminology that was introduced earlier in this book, domain analysis may
be viewed as an umbrella activity for the software process. By this I mean that do-
main analysis is an ongoing software engineering activity that is not connected to
any one software project. In a way, the role of a domain analyst is similar to the role
of a master toolsmith in a heavy manufacturing environment. The job of the tool-
smith is to design and build tools that may be used by many people doing similar but
not necessarily the same jobs. The role of the domain analyst5 is to discover and de-
fine analysis patterns, analysis classes, and related information that may be used by
many people working on similar but not necessarily the same applications.
Figure 6.2 [Ara89] illustrates key inputs and outputs for the domain analysis
process. Sources of domain knowledge are surveyed in an attempt to identify objects
that can be reused across the domain.
Domain analysis
doesn’t look at a
specific application, but
rather at the domain in
which the application
resides. The intent is
to identify common
problem solving
elements that are
applicable to all
applications within
the domain.
Domain
analysis
Sources of
domain
knowledge
Customer surveys
Expert advice
Current/future requirements
Existing applications
Technical literature
Domain
analysis
model
Functional models
Domain languages
Reuse standards
Class taxonomies
FIGURE 6.2
Input and output for domain analysis
4
A complementary view of domain analysis “involves modeling the domain so that software engi-
neers and other stakeholders can better learn about it . . . not all domain classes necessarily result
in the development of reusable classes . . .” [Let03a].
5
Do not make the assumption that because a domain analyst is at work, a software engineer need
not understand the application domain. Every member of a software team should have some un-
derstanding of the domain in which the software is to be placed.

CHAPTER 6
REQUIREMENTS MODELING: SCENARIOS, INFORMATION, AND ANALYSIS CLASSES 153
Domain Analysis
The scene: Doug Miller’s office, after
a meeting with marketing.
The players: Doug Miller, software engineering
manager, and Vinod Raman, a member of the software
engineering team.
The conversation:
Doug: I need you for a special project, Vinod. I’m going
to pull you out of the requirements gathering meetings.
Vinod (frowning): Too bad. That format actually
works . . . I was getting something out of it. What’s up?
Doug: Jamie and Ed will cover for you. Anyway,
marketing insists that we deliver the Internet capability
along with the home security function in the first release of
SafeHome. We’re under the gun on this . . . not enough
time or people, so we’ve got to solve both problems—the
PC interface and the Web interface—at once.
Vinod (looking confused): I didn’t know the plan was
set . . . we’re not even finished with requirements gathering.
Doug (a wan smile): I know, but the time lines are so
short that I decided to begin strategizing with marketing
right now . . . anyhow, we’ll revisit any tentative plan
once we have the info from all of the requirements
gathering meetings.
Vinod: Okay, what’s up? What do you want me to do?
Doug: Do you know what “domain analysis” is?
Vinod: Sort of. You look for similar patterns in Apps
that do the same kinds of things as the App you’re
building. If possible, you then steal the patterns and reuse
them in your work.
Doug: Not sure I like the word steal, but basically you
have it right. What I’d like you to do is to begin researching
existing user interfaces for systems that control something
like SafeHome. I want you to propose a set of patterns and
analysis classes that can be common to both the PC-based
interface that’ll sit in the house and the browser-based
interface that is accessible via the Internet.
Vinod: We can save time by making them the same . . .
why don’t we just do that?
Doug: Ah . . . it’s nice to have people who think like you
do. That’s the whole point—we can save time and effort if
both interfaces are nearly identical, implemented with the
same code, blah, blah, that marketing insists on.
Vinod: So you want, what—classes, analysis patterns,
design patterns?
Doug: All of ‘em. Nothing formal at this point. I just want
to get a head start on our internal analysis and design work.
Vinod: I’ll go to our class library and see what we’ve
got. I’ll also use a patterns template I saw in a book I was
reading a few months back.
Doug: Good. Go to work.
SAFEHOME
6.1.4
Requirements Modeling Approaches
One view of requirements modeling, called structured analysis, considers data and
the processes that transform the data as separate entities. Data objects are modeled
in a way that defines their attributes and relationships. Processes that manipulate
data objects are modeled in a manner that shows how they transform data as data
objects flow through the system.
A second approach to analysis modeling, called object-oriented analysis, focuses
on the definition of classes and the manner in which they collaborate with one an-
other to effect customer requirements. UML and the Unified Process (Chapter 2) are
predominantly object oriented.
Although the requirements model proposed in this book combines features of
both approaches, software teams often choose one approach and exclude all repre-
sentations from the other. The question is not which is best, but rather, what
uote:
“…analysisis
frustrating,full
ofcomplex
interpersonal
relationships,
indefinite,and
difficult.Inaword,it
isfascinating.Once
you’rehooked,the
oldeasypleasuresof
systembuildingare
neveragainenough
tosatisfyyou.”
Tom DeMarco

154
PART TWO
MODELING
combination of representations will provide stakeholders with the best model of
software requirements and the most effective bridge to software design.
Each element of the requirements model (Figure 6.3) presents the problem from
a different point of view. Scenario-based elements depict how the user interacts with
the system and the specific sequence of activities that occur as the software is used.
Class-based elements model the objects that the system will manipulate, the opera-
tions that will be applied to the objects to effect the manipulation, relationships
(some hierarchical) between the objects, and the collaborations that occur between
the classes that are defined. Behavioral elements depict how external events change
the state of the system or the classes that reside within it. Finally, flow-oriented ele-
ments represent the system as an information transform, depicting how data objects
are transformed as they flow through various system functions.
Analysis modeling leads to the derivation of each of these modeling elements.
However, the specific content of each element (i.e., the diagrams that are used to
construct the element and the model) may differ from project to project. As we have
noted a number of times in this book, the software team must work to keep it sim-
ple. Only those modeling elements that add value to the model should be used.
6.2
SCENARIO-BASED MODELING
Although the success of a computer-based system or product is measured in many
ways, user satisfaction resides at the top of the list. If you understand how end users
(and other actors) want to interact with a system, your software team will be better
able to properly characterize requirements and build meaningful analysis and design
What
different
points of view 
can be used to
describe the
requirements
model?
?
uote:
“Why should we
build models? Why
not just build the
system itself? The
answer is that we
can construct
models in such a
way as to highlight,
or emphasize,
certain critical
features of a
system, while
simultaneously
de-emphasizing
other aspects of
the system.”
Ed Yourdon
Software
Requirements
Class
models
e.g.,
class diagrams
collaboration diagrams
Flow
models
e.g.,
DFDs
data models
Scenario-based
models
e.g.,
use cases
user stories
Behavioral
models
e.g.,
state diagrams
sequence diagrams
FIGURE 6.3
Elements of
the analysis
model

models. Hence, requirements modeling with UML6 begins with the creation of sce-
narios in the form of use cases, activity diagrams, and swimlane diagrams.
6.2.1
Creating a Preliminary Use Case
Alistair Cockburn characterizes a use case as a “contract for behavior” [Coc01b]. As
we discussed in Chapter 5, the “contract” defines the way in which an actor7 uses a
computer-based system to accomplish some goal. In essence, a use case captures
the interactions that occur between producers and consumers of information and
the system itself. In this section, I examine how use cases are developed as part
of the requirements modeling activity.8
In Chapter 5, I noted that a use case describes a specific usage scenario in straight-
forward language from the point of view of a defined actor. But how do you know
(1) what to write about, (2) how much to write about it, (3) how detailed to make your
description, and (4) how to organize the description? These are the questions that
must be answered if use cases are to provide value as a requirements modeling tool.
What to write about?
The first two requirements engineering tasks—inception
and elicitation—provide you with the information you’ll need to begin writing use
cases. Requirements gathering meetings, QFD, and other requirements engineering
mechanisms are used to identify stakeholders, define the scope of the problem, spec-
ify overall operational goals, establish priorities, outline all known functional re-
quirements, and describe the things (objects) that will be manipulated by the system.
To begin developing a set of use cases, list the functions or activities performed
by a specific actor. You can obtain these from a list of required system functions,
through conversations with stakeholders, or by an evaluation of activity diagrams
(Section 6.3.1) developed as part of requirements modeling.
CHAPTER 6
REQUIREMENTS MODELING: SCENARIOS, INFORMATION, AND ANALYSIS CLASSES 155
uote:
“[Use cases] are
simply an aid to
defining what
exists outside the
system (actors)
and what should be
performed by the
system (use
cases).”
Ivar Jacobson
In some situations, use
cases become the
dominant requirements
engineering
mechanism. However,
this does not mean
that you should discard
other modeling
methods when they
are appropriate.
6
UML will be used as the modeling notation throughout this book. Appendix 1 provides a brief tuto-
rial for those readers who may be unfamiliar with basic UML notation.
7
An actor is not a specific person, but rather a role that a person (or a device) plays within a specific
context. An actor “calls on the system to deliver one of its services” [Coc01b].
8
Use cases are a particularly important part of analysis modeling for user interfaces. Interface analy-
sis is discussed in detail in Chapter 11.
The scene: A meeting room, during
the second requirements gathering meeting.
The players: Jamie Lazar, software team member; 
Ed Robbins, software team member; Doug Miller,
software engineering manager; three members of
marketing; a product engineering representative; and a
facilitator.
The conversation:
Facilitator: It’s time that we begin talking about
the SafeHome surveillance function. Let’s develop 
a user scenario for access to the surveillance 
function.
Jamie: Who plays the role of the actor on this?
SAFEHOME
Developing Another Preliminary User Scenario

156
PART TWO
MODELING
The SafeHome home surveillance function (subsystem) discussed in the sidebar
identifies the following functions (an abbreviated list) that are performed by the
homeowner actor:
• Select camera to view.
• Request thumbnails from all cameras.
• Display camera views in a PC window.
• Control pan and zoom for a specific camera.
• Selectively record camera output.
• Replay camera output.
• Access camera surveillance via the Internet.
As further conversations with the stakeholder (who plays the role of a homeowner)
progress, the requirements gathering team develops use cases for each of the func-
tions noted. In general, use cases are written first in an informal narrative fashion. If
more formality is required, the same use case is rewritten using a structured format
similar to the one proposed in Chapter 5 and reproduced later in this section as a
sidebar.
Facilitator: I think Meredith (a marketing person) has
been working on that functionality. Why don’t you play
the role?
Meredith: You want to do it the same way we did it last
time, right?
Facilitator: Right . . . same way.
Meredith: Well, obviously the reason for surveillance is
to allow the homeowner to check out the house while he
or she is away, to record and play back video that is
captured . . . that sort of thing.
Ed: Will we use compression to store the video?
Facilitator: Good question, Ed, but let’s postpone
implementation issues for now. Meredith?
Meredith: Okay, so basically there are two parts to the
surveillance function . . . the first configures the system
including laying out a floor plan—we have to have tools
to help the homeowner do this—and the second part is
the actual surveillance function itself. Since the layout is
part of the configuration activity, I’ll focus on the
surveillance function.
Facilitator (smiling): Took the words right out of my
mouth.
Meredith: Um . . . I want to gain access to the
surveillance function either via the PC or via the Internet.
My feeling is that the Internet access would be more
frequently used. Anyway, I want to be able to display
camera views on a PC and control pan and zoom for a
specific camera. I specify the camera by selecting it from
the house floor plan. I want to selectively record camera
output and replay camera output. I also want to be able
to block access to one or more cameras with a specific
password. I also want the option of seeing small windows
that show views from all cameras and then be able to
pick the one I want enlarged.
Jamie: Those are called thumbnail views.
Meredith: Okay, then I want thumbnail views of
all the cameras. I also want the interface for the
surveillance function to have the same look and feel
as all other SafeHome interfaces. I want it to be
intuitive, meaning I don’t want to have to read a manual
to use it.
Facilitator: Good job. Now, let’s go into this function in
a bit more detail . . .

To illustrate, consider the function access camera surveillance via the Internet—
display camera views (ACS-DCV). The stakeholder who takes on the role of the
homeowner actor might write the following narrative:
Use case: Access camera surveillance via the Internet—display camera views
(ACS-DCV)
Actor: homeowner
If I’m at a remote location, I can use any PC with appropriate browser software to log
on to the SafeHome Products website. I enter my user ID and two levels of passwords and
once I’m validated, I have access to all functionality for my installed SafeHome system. To
access a specific camera view, I select “surveillance” from the major function buttons dis-
played. I then select “pick a camera” and the floor plan of the house is displayed. I then se-
lect the camera that I’m interested in. Alternatively, I can look at thumbnail snapshots from
all cameras simultaneously by selecting “all cameras” as my viewing choice. Once I choose
a camera, I select “view” and a one-frame-per-second view appears in a viewing window
that is identified by the camera ID. If I want to switch cameras, I select “pick a camera” and
the original viewing window disappears and the floor plan of the house is displayed again.
I then select the camera that I’m interested in. A new viewing window appears.
A variation of a narrative use case presents the interaction as an ordered sequence
of user actions. Each action is represented as a declarative sentence. Revisiting the
ACS-DCV function, you would write:
Use case: Access camera surveillance via the Internet—display camera views
(ACS-DCV)
Actor: homeowner
1. The homeowner logs onto the SafeHome Products website.
2. The homeowner enters his or her user ID.
3. The homeowner enters two passwords (each at least eight characters in length).
4. The system displays all major function buttons.
5. The homeowner selects the “surveillance” from the major function buttons.
6. The homeowner selects “pick a camera.”
7. The system displays the floor plan of the house.
8. The homeowner selects a camera icon from the floor plan.
9. The homeowner selects the “view” button.
10. The system displays a viewing window that is identified by the camera ID.
11. The system displays video output within the viewing window at one frame per
second.
It is important to note that this sequential presentation does not consider any alterna-
tive interactions (the narrative is more free-flowing and did represent a few alterna-
tives). Use cases of this type are sometimes referred to as primary scenarios [Sch98a].
CHAPTER 6
REQUIREMENTS MODELING: SCENARIOS, INFORMATION, AND ANALYSIS CLASSES 157
uote:
“Use cases can be
used in many
[software]
processes. Our
favorite is a
process that is
iterative and risk
driven.”
Geri Schneider
and Jason
Winters

158
PART TWO
MODELING
6.2.2
Refining a Preliminary Use Case
A description of alternative interactions is essential for a complete understanding of
the function that is being described by a use case. Therefore, each step in the primary
scenario is evaluated by asking the following questions [Sch98a]:
• Can the actor take some other action at this point?
• Is it possible that the actor will encounter some error condition at this point? If
so, what might it be?
• Is it possible that the actor will encounter some other behavior at this point (e.g.,
behavior that is invoked by some event outside the actor’s control)? If so, what
might it be?
Answers to these questions result in the creation of a set of secondary scenarios that
are part of the original use case but represent alternative behavior. For example, con-
sider steps 6 and 7 in the primary scenario presented earlier:
6. The homeowner selects “pick a camera.”
7. The system displays the floor plan of the house.
Can the actor take some other action at this point? The answer is “yes.” Referring to
the free-flowing narrative, the actor may choose to view thumbnail snapshots of all
cameras simultaneously. Hence, one secondary scenario might be  “View thumbnail
snapshots for all cameras.”
Is it possible that the actor will encounter some error condition at this point? Any
number of error conditions can occur as a computer-based system operates. In this
context, we consider only error conditions that are likely as a direct result of the ac-
tion described in step 6 or step 7. Again the answer to the question is “yes.” A floor
plan with camera icons may have never been configured. Hence, selecting “pick a
camera” results in an error condition: “No floor plan configured for this house.”9 This
error condition becomes a secondary scenario.
Is it possible that the actor will encounter some other behavior at this point? Again
the answer to the question is “yes.” As steps 6 and 7 occur, the system may encounter
an alarm condition. This would result in the system displaying a special alarm noti-
fication (type, location, system action) and providing the actor with a number of op-
tions relevant to the nature of the alarm. Because this secondary scenario can occur
at any time for virtually all interactions, it will not become part of the ACS-DCV use
case. Rather, a separate use case—Alarm condition encountered—would be de-
veloped and referenced from other use cases as required.
How do I
examine
alternative
courses of action
when I develop a
use case?
?
9
In this case, another actor, the system administrator, would have to configure the floor plan,
install and initialize (e.g., assign an equipment ID) all cameras, and test each camera to be certain
that it is accessible via the system and through the floor plan.

CHAPTER 6
REQUIREMENTS MODELING: SCENARIOS, INFORMATION, AND ANALYSIS CLASSES 159
Each of the situations described in the preceding paragraphs is characterized as
a use-case exception. An exception describes a situation (either a failure condition or
an alternative chosen by the actor) that causes the system to exhibit somewhat
different behavior.
Cockburn [Coc01b] recommends using a “brainstorming” session to derive a
reasonably complete set of exceptions for each use case. In addition to the three
generic questions suggested earlier in this section, the following issues should also
be explored:
• Are there cases in which some “validation function” occurs during this use case?
This implies that validation function is invoked and a potential error condition
might occur.
• Are there cases in which a supporting function (or actor) will fail to respond
appropriately? For example, a user action awaits a response but the function
that is to respond times out.
• Can poor system performance result in unexpected or improper user actions? For
example, a Web-based interface responds too slowly, resulting in a user
making multiple selects on a processing button. These selects queue inap-
propriately and ultimately generate an error condition.
The list of extensions developed as a consequence of asking and answering these
questions should be “rationalized” [Co01b] using the following criteria: an exception
should be noted within the use case if the software can detect the condition
described and then handle the condition once it has been detected. In some cases,
an exception will precipitate the development of another use case (to handle the
condition noted).
6.2.3
Writing a Formal Use Case
The informal use cases presented in Section 6.2.1 are sometimes sufficient for
requirements modeling. However, when a use case involves a critical activity or
describes a complex set of steps with a significant number of exceptions, a more for-
mal approach may be desirable.
The ACS-DCV use case shown in the sidebar follows a typical outline for formal
use cases. The goal in context identifies the overall scope of the use case. The
precondition describes what is known to be true before the use case is initiated.
The trigger identifies the event or condition that “gets the use case started” [Coc01b].
The scenario lists the specific actions that are required by the actor and the appro-
priate system responses. Exceptions identify the situations uncovered as the prelim-
inary use case is refined (Section 6.2.2). Additional headings may or may not be
included and are reasonably self-explanatory.

160
PART TWO
MODELING
WebRef
When are you finished
writing use cases? For
a worthwhile discussion
of this topic, see
ootips.org/use-
cases-done.html.
In many cases, there is no need to create a graphical representation of a usage
scenario. However, diagrammatic representation can facilitate understanding, par-
ticularly when the scenario is complex. As we noted earlier in this book, UML does
provide use-case diagramming capability. Figure 6.4 depicts a preliminary use-case
diagram for the SafeHome product. Each use case is represented by an oval. Only the
ACS-DCV use case  has been discussed in this section.
Use case: Access camera surveillance
via the Internet—display camera
views (ACS-DCV)
Iteration:
2, last modification: January 14 by
V. Raman.
Primary actor:
Homeowner.
Goal in context: To view output of camera placed
throughout the house from any
remote location via the Internet.
Preconditions:
System must be fully configured;
appropriate user ID and passwords
must be obtained.
Trigger:
The homeowner decides to take 
a look inside the house while 
away.
Scenario:
1. The homeowner logs onto the SafeHome Products
website.
2. The homeowner enters his or her user ID.
3. The homeowner enters two passwords (each at least
eight characters in length).
4. The system displays all major function buttons.
5. The homeowner selects the “surveillance” from the
major function buttons.
6. The homeowner selects “pick a camera.”
7. The system displays the floor plan of the house.
8. The homeowner selects a camera icon from the floor
plan.
9. The homeowner selects the “view” button.
10. The system displays a viewing window that is
identified by the camera ID.
11. The system displays video output within the viewing
window at one frame per second.
Exceptions:
1. ID or passwords are incorrect or not recognized—
see use case Validate ID and passwords.
2. Surveillance function not configured for this
system—system displays appropriate error message;
see use case Configure surveillance function.
3. Homeowner selects “View thumbnail snapshots for
all camera”—see use case View thumbnail
snapshots for all cameras.
4. A floor plan is not available or has not been
configured—display appropriate error message and
see use case Configure floor plan.
5. An alarm condition is encountered—see use case
Alarm condition encountered.
Priority:
Moderate priority, to be
implemented after basic functions.
When available:
Third increment.
Frequency of use:
Moderate frequency.
Channel to actor:
Via PC-based browser and
Internet connection.
Secondary actors: System administrator, cameras.
Channels to secondary actors:
1. System administrator: PC-based system.
2. Cameras: wireless connectivity.
Open issues:
1. What mechanisms protect unauthorized use of this
capability by employees of SafeHome Products?
2. Is security sufficient? Hacking into this feature would
represent a major invasion of privacy.
3. Will system response via the Internet be acceptable
given the bandwidth required for camera views?
4. Will we develop a capability to provide video at a
higher frames-per-second rate when high-
bandwidth connections are available?
SAFEHOME
Use Case Template for Surveillance

Every modeling notation has limitations, and the use case is no exception. Like
any other form of written description, a use case is only as good as its author(s). If
the description is unclear, the use case can be misleading or ambiguous. A use case
focuses on functional and behavioral requirements and is generally inappropriate for
nonfunctional requirements. For situations in which the requirements model must
have significant detail and precision (e.g., safety critical systems), a use case may not
be sufficient.
However, scenario-based modeling is appropriate for a significant majority of all
situations that you will encounter as a software engineer. If developed properly, the
use case can provide substantial benefit as a modeling tool.
6.3
UML MODELS THAT SUPPLEMENT THE USE CASE
There are many requirements modeling situations in which a text-based model—
even one as simple as a use case—may not impart information in a clear and con-
cise manner. In such cases, you can choose from a broad array of UML graphical
models.
6.3.1
Developing an Activity Diagram
The UML activity diagram supplements the use case by providing a graphical repre-
sentation of the flow of interaction within a specific scenario. Similar to the flowchart,
an activity diagram uses rounded rectangles to imply a specific system function,
arrows to represent flow through the system, decision diamonds to depict a branch-
ing decision (each arrow emanating from the diamond is labeled), and solid horizon-
tal lines to indicate that parallel activities are occurring. An activity diagram for the
ACS-DCV use case is shown in Figure 6.5. It should be noted that the activity dia-
gram adds additional detail not directly mentioned (but implied) by the use case.
CHAPTER 6
REQUIREMENTS MODELING: SCENARIOS, INFORMATION, AND ANALYSIS CLASSES 161
A UML activity diagram
represents the actions
and decisions that
occur as some function
is performed.
Home-
owner
Access camera 
surveillance via the 
Internet
Configure SafeHome 
system parameters
Set alarm
Cameras
SafeHome
FIGURE 6.4
Preliminary
use-case
diagram for
the SafeHome
system

162
PART TWO
MODELING
For example, a user may only attempt to enter userID and password a limited num-
ber of times. This is represented by a decision diamond below “Prompt for reentry.”
6.3.2
Swimlane Diagrams
The UML swimlane diagram is a useful variation of the activity diagram and allows
you to represent the flow of activities described by the use case and at the same time
indicate which actor (if there are multiple actors involved in a specific use case) or
analysis class (discussed later in this chapter) has responsibility for the action de-
scribed by an activity rectangle. Responsibilities are represented as parallel seg-
ments that divide the diagram vertically, like the lanes in a swimming pool.
Three analysis classes—Homeowner, Camera, and Interface—have direct or
indirect responsibilities in the context of the activity diagram represented in Figure 6.5.
Enter password 
and user ID
Select major
function
Valid passwords/ID
Prompt for reentry
Invalid passwords/ID
Input tries remain
No input 
tries remain
Select surveillance
Other functions
may also 
be selected
 
Thumbnail views
Select a specific camera
Select camera icon
Prompt for 
another view
Select specific 
camera - thumbnails
Exit this function
See another camera
View camera output 
in labeled window
FIGURE 6.5
Activity
diagram for
Access
camera
surveillance
via the
Internet—
display
camera views
function.
A UML swimlane
diagram represents the
flow of actions and
decisions and indicates
which actors perform
each.

CHAPTER 6
REQUIREMENTS MODELING: SCENARIOS, INFORMATION, AND ANALYSIS CLASSES 163
Enter password 
and user ID
Select major function
Valid passwords/ID
Prompt for reentry
Invalid 
passwords/ID
Input tries 
remain
No input
tries remain
Select surveillance
Other functions
may also be
selected
 
Thumbnail views
Select a specific camera
Select camera icon
Generate video
output
Select specific
camera - thumbnails
Exit this
function
See
another
camera
Homeowner
Camera
Interface
Prompt for
another view
View camera output
in labelled window
 
FIGURE 6.6
Swimlane diagram for Access camera surveillance via the Internet—display camera
views function
Referring to Figure 6.6, the activity diagram is rearranged so that activities associated
with a particular analysis class fall inside the swimlane for that class. For example, the
Interface class represents the user interface as seen by the homeowner. The activity
diagram notes two prompts that are the responsibility of the interface—“prompt for
reentry” and “prompt for another view.” These prompts and the decisions associated
with them fall within the Interface swimlane. However, arrows lead from that swim-
lane back to the Homeowner swimlane, where homeowner actions occur.
Use cases, along with the activity and swimlane diagrams, are procedurally ori-
ented. They represent the manner in which various actors invoke specific functions
uote:
“A good model
guides your
thinking, a bad one
warps it.”
Brian Marick

164
PART TWO
MODELING
(or other procedural steps) to meet the requirements of the system. But a procedural
view of requirements represents only a single dimension of a system. In Section 6.4,
I examine the information space and how data requirements can be represented.
6.4
DATA MODELING CONCEPTS
If software requirements include the need to create, extend, or interface with a data-
base or if complex data structures must be constructed and manipulated, the soft-
ware team may choose to create a data model as part of overall requirements
modeling. A software engineer or analyst defines all data objects that are processed
within the system, the relationships between the data objects, and other information
that is pertinent to the relationships. The entity-relationship diagram (ERD) addresses
these issues and represents all data objects that are entered, stored, transformed,
and produced within an application.
6.4.1
Data Objects
A data object is a representation of composite information that must be understood
by software. By composite information, I mean something that has a number of dif-
ferent properties or attributes. Therefore, width (a single value) would not be a valid
data object, but dimensions (incorporating height, width, and depth) could be
defined as an object.
A data object can be an external entity (e.g., anything that produces or consumes
information), a thing (e.g., a report or a display), an occurrence (e.g., a telephone
call) or event (e.g., an alarm), a role (e.g., salesperson), an organizational unit (e.g.,
accounting department), a place (e.g., a warehouse), or a structure (e.g., a file). For
example, a person or a car can be viewed as a data object in the sense that either
can be defined in terms of a set of attributes. The description of the data object
incorporates the data object and all of its attributes.
A data object encapsulates data only—there is no reference within a data object
to operations that act on the data.10 Therefore, the data object can be represented as
a table as shown in Figure 6.7. The headings in the table reflect attributes of the ob-
ject. In this case, a car is defined in terms of make, model, ID number, body type, color,
and owner. The body of the table represents specific instances of the data object. For
example, a Chevy Corvette is an instance of the data object car.
6.4.2
Data Attributes
Data attributes define the properties of a data object and take on one of three different
characteristics. They can be used to (1) name an instance of the data object, (2) describe
the instance, or (3) make reference to another instance in another table. In addition,
one or more of the attributes must be defined as an identifier—that is, the identifier
WebRef
Useful information on
data modeling can be
found at www
.datamodel.org.
How does a
data object
manifest itself
within the context
of an application?
?
A data object is a
representation of any
composite information
that is processed by
software.
Attributes name a data
object, describe its
characteristics, and in
some cases, make
reference to another
object.
10 This distinction separates the data object from the class or object defined as part of the object-
oriented approach (Appendix 2).

CHAPTER 6
REQUIREMENTS MODELING: SCENARIOS, INFORMATION, AND ANALYSIS CLASSES 165
11 Readers who are unfamiliar with object-oriented concepts and terminology should refer to the brief
tutorial presented in Appendix 2.
Make
Model
ID#
Body type Color
Owner
Identifier
Instance
Lexus
Chevy
BMW
Ford
LS400
Corvette
750iL
Taurus
AB123. . .
X456. . .
XZ765. . .
Q12A45. . .
Sedan
Sports
Coupe
Sedan
White
Red
White
Blue
RSP
CCD
LJL
BLF
Ties one data object to another,
in this case, owner
Naming
attributes
Descriptive
attributes
Referential
attributes
FIGURE 6.7
Tabular
representation
of data objects
attribute becomes a “key” when we want to find an instance of the data object. In some
cases, values for the identifier(s) are unique, although this is not a requirement. Refer-
ring to the data object car, a reasonable identifier might be the ID number.
The set of attributes that is appropriate for a given data object is determined
through an understanding of the problem context. The attributes for car might serve
well for an application that would be used by a department of motor vehicles, but
these attributes would be useless for an automobile company that needs manufac-
turing control software. In the latter case, the attributes for car might also include ID
number, body type, and color, but many additional attributes (e.g., interior code, drive train
type, trim package designator, transmission type) would have to be added to make car a
meaningful object in the manufacturing control context.
A common question occurs when data objects
are discussed: Is a data object the same thing
as an object-oriented11 class? The answer is “no.”
A data object defines a composite data item; that is,
it incorporates a collection of individual data items
(attributes) and gives the collection of items a name (the
name of the data object).
An object-oriented class encapsulates data attributes
but also incorporates the operations (methods) that
manipulate the data implied by those attributes.
In addition, the definition of classes implies a
comprehensive infrastructure that is part of the object-
oriented software engineering approach. Classes
communicate with one another via messages, they can
be organized into hierarchies, and they provide
inheritance characteristics for objects that are an
instance of a class.
INFO
6.4.3
Relationships
Data objects are connected to one another in different ways. Consider the two data
objects, person and car. These objects can be represented using the simple notation
WebRef
A concept called
“normalization” is
important to those who
intend to do thorough
data modeling. A
useful introduction
can be found at
www
.datamodel.org.
Data Objects and Object-Oriented Classes—Are They the Same Thing?

166
PART TWO
MODELING
INFO
person
car
(a)  A basic connection between data
objects
owns
insured to
drive
(b)  Relationships between data
objects
person
car
FIGURE 6.8
Relationships
between data
objects
illustrated in Figure 6.8a. A connection is established between person and car
because the two objects are related. But what are the relationships? To determine the
answer, you should understand the role of people (owners, in this case) and cars
within the context of the software to be built. You can establish a set of object/
relationship pairs that define the relevant relationships. For example,
• A person owns a car.
• A person is insured to drive a car.
The relationships owns and insured to drive define the relevant connections between
person and car. Figure 6.8b illustrates these object-relationship pairs graphically.
The arrows noted in Figure 6.8b provide important information about the direction-
ality of the relationship and often reduce ambiguity or misinterpretations.
12 Although the ERD is still used in some database design applications, UML notation (Appendix 1)
can now be used for data design.
13 The cardinality of an object-relationship pair specifies “the number of occurrences of one [object]
that can be related to the number of occurrences of another [object]” {Til93]. The modality of a re-
lationship is 0 if there is no explicit need for the relationship to occur or the relationship is optional.
The modality is 1 if an occurrence of the relationship is mandatory.
Relationships indicate
the manner in which
data objects are
connected to one
another.
Entity-Relationship Diagrams
The object-relationship pair is the cornerstone
of the data model. These pairs can be
represented graphically using the entity-relationship
diagram (ERD).12 The ERD was originally proposed by
Peter Chen [Che77] for the design of relational database
systems and has been extended by others. A set of
primary components is identified for the ERD: data objects,
attributes, relationships, and various type indicators. The
primary purpose of the ERD is to represent data objects
and their relationships.
Rudimentary ERD notation has already been
introduced. Data objects are represented by a labeled
rectangle. Relationships are indicated with a labeled line
connecting objects. In some variations of the ERD, the
connecting line contains a diamond that is labeled with the
relationship. Connections between data objects and
relationships are established using a variety of special
symbols that indicate cardinality and modality.13 If you
desire further information about data modeling and the
entity-relationship diagram, see [Hob06] or [Sim05].

6.5
CLASS-BASED MODELING
Class-based modeling represents the objects that the system will manipulate, the
operations (also called methods or services) that will be applied to the objects to
effect the manipulation, relationships (some hierarchical) between the objects, and
the collaborations that occur between the classes that are defined. The elements
of a class-based model include classes and objects, attributes, operations, class-
responsibility-collaborator (CRC) models, collaboration diagrams, and packages.
The sections that follow present a series of informal guidelines that will assist in
their identification and representation.
6.5.1
Identifying Analysis Classes
If you look around a room, there is a set of physical objects that can be easily iden-
tified, classified, and defined (in terms of attributes and operations). But when you
“look around” the problem space of a software application, the classes (and objects)
may be more difficult to comprehend.
We can begin to identify classes by examining the usage scenarios developed as
part of the requirements model and performing a “grammatical parse” [Abb83] on
the use cases developed for the system to be built. Classes are determined by un-
derlining each noun or noun phrase and entering it into a simple table. Synonyms
should be noted. If the class (noun) is required to implement a solution, then it is part
of the solution space; otherwise, if a class is necessary only to describe a solution, it
is part of the problem space.
CHAPTER 6
REQUIREMENTS MODELING: SCENARIOS, INFORMATION, AND ANALYSIS CLASSES 167
Data Modeling
Objective: Data modeling tools provide a
software engineer with the ability to represent
data objects, their characteristics, and their relationships.
Used primarily for large database applications and other
information systems projects, data modeling tools provide
an automated means for creating comprehensive entity-
relation diagrams, data object dictionaries, and related
models.
Mechanics: Tools in this category enable the user to
describe data objects and their relationships. In some cases,
the tools use ERD notation. In others, the tools model relations
using some other mechanism. Tools in this category are often
used as part of database design and enable the creation of
a database model by generating a database schema for
common database management systems (DBMS).
Representative Tools:14
AllFusion ERWin, developed by Computer Associates
(www3.ca.com), assists in the design of data objects,
proper structure, and key elements for databases.
ER/Studio, developed by Embarcadero Software
(www.embarcadero.com), supports entity-
relationship modeling.
Oracle Designer, developed by Oracle Systems
(www.oracle.com), “models business processes,
data entities and relationships [that] are transformed
into designs from which complete applications and
databases are generated.”
Visible Analyst, developed by Visible Systems
(www.visible.com), supports a variety of analysis
modeling functions including data modeling.
SOFTWARE TOOLS
14 Tools noted here do not represent an endorsement, but rather a sampling of tools in this category.
In most cases, tool names are trademarked by their respective developers.
uote:
“The really hard
problem is
discovering what
are the right
objects [classes] in
the first place.”
Carl Argila

168
PART TWO
MODELING
But what should we look for once all of the nouns have been isolated? Analysis
classes manifest themselves in one of the following ways:
• External entities (e.g., other systems, devices, people) that produce or
consume information to be used by a computer-based system.
• Things (e.g., reports, displays, letters, signals) that are part of the information
domain for the problem.
• Occurrences or events (e.g., a property transfer or the completion of a series
of robot movements) that occur within the context of system operation.
• Roles (e.g., manager, engineer, salesperson) played by people who interact
with the system.
• Organizational units (e.g., division, group, team) that are relevant to an appli-
cation.
• Places (e.g., manufacturing floor or loading dock) that establish the context of
the problem and the overall function of the system.
• Structures (e.g., sensors, four-wheeled vehicles, or computers) that define a
class of objects or related classes of objects.
This categorization is but one of many that have been proposed in the literature.15
For example, Budd [Bud96] suggests a taxonomy of classes that includes producers
(sources) and consumers (sinks) of data, data managers, view or observer classes, and
helper classes.
It is also important to note what classes or objects are not. In general, a class
should never have an “imperative procedural name” [Cas89]. For example, if the de-
velopers of software for a medical imaging system defined an object with the name
InvertImage or even ImageInversion, they would be making a subtle mistake. The
Image obtained from the software could, of course, be a class (it is a thing that is
part of the information domain). Inversion of the image is an operation that is ap-
plied to the object. It is likely that inversion would be defined as an operation for the
object Image, but it would not be defined as a separate class to connote “image
inversion.” As Cashman [Cas89] states: “the intent of object-orientation is to encap-
sulate, but still keep separate, data and operations on the data.”
To illustrate how analysis classes might be defined during the early stages of mod-
eling, consider a grammatical parse (nouns are underlined, verbs italicized) for a
processing narrative16 for the SafeHome security function.
How do
analysis
classes manifest
themselves as
elements of the
solution space?
?
15 Another important categorization, defining entity, boundary, and controller classes, is discussed in
Section 6.5.4.
16 A processing narrative is similar to the use case in style but somewhat different in purpose. The
processing narrative provides an overall description of the function to be developed. It is not a sce-
nario written from one actor’s point of view. It is important to note, however, that a grammatical
parse can also be used for every use case developed as part of requirements gathering (elicitation).

The SafeHome security function enables the homeowner to configure the security system
when it is installed, monitors all sensors connected to the security system, and interacts
with the homeowner through the Internet, a PC, or a control panel.
During installation, the SafeHome PC is used to program and configure the system.
Each sensor is assigned a number and type, a master password is programmed for arming
and disarming the system, and telephone number(s) are input for dialing when a sensor
event occurs.
When a sensor event is recognized, the software invokes an audible alarm attached to
the system. After a delay time that is specified by the homeowner during system configu-
ration activities, the software dials a telephone number of a monitoring service, provides
information about the location, reporting the nature of the event that has been detected.
The telephone number will be redialed every 20 seconds until telephone connection is
obtained.
The homeowner receives security information via a control panel, the PC, or a browser,
collectively called an interface. The interface displays prompting messages and system
status information on the control panel, the PC ,or the browser window. Homeowner in-
teraction takes the following form . . . 
Extracting the nouns, we can propose a number of potential classes:
Potential Class
General Classification
homeowner
role or external entity
sensor
external entity
control panel
external entity
installation
occurrence
system (alias security system)
thing
number, type
not objects, attributes of sensor
master password
thing
telephone number
thing
sensor event
occurrence
audible alarm
external entity
monitoring service
organizational unit or external entity
The list would be continued until all nouns in the processing narrative have been
considered. Note that I call each entry in the list a potential object. You must consider
each further before a final decision is made.
Coad and Yourdon [Coa91] suggest six selection characteristics that should be
used as you consider each potential class for inclusion in the analysis model:
1.
Retained information. The potential class will be useful during analysis only if
information about it must be remembered so that the system can function.
2.
Needed services. The potential class must have a set of identifiable operations
that can change the value of its attributes in some way.
CHAPTER 6
REQUIREMENTS MODELING: SCENARIOS, INFORMATION, AND ANALYSIS CLASSES 169
The grammatical parse
is not foolproof, but it
can provide you with
an excellent jump
start, if you’re strug-
gling to define data
objects and the trans-
forms that operate on
them.
How do I
determine
whether a
potential class
should, in fact,
become an
analysis class?
?

170
PART TWO
MODELING
3.
Multiple attributes. During requirement analysis, the focus should be on
“major” information; a class with a single attribute may, in fact, be useful
during design, but is probably better represented as an attribute of another
class during the analysis activity.
4.
Common attributes. A set of attributes can be defined for the potential class
and these attributes apply to all instances of the class.
5.
Common operations. A set of operations can be defined for the potential class
and these operations apply to all instances of the class.
6.
Essential requirements. External entities that appear in the problem space and
produce or consume information essential to the operation of any solution for
the system will almost always be defined as classes in the requirements model.
To be considered a legitimate class for inclusion in the requirements model, a po-
tential object should satisfy all (or almost all) of these characteristics. The decision
for inclusion of potential classes in the analysis model is somewhat subjective, and
later evaluation may cause an object to be discarded or reinstated. However, the first
step of class-based modeling is the definition of classes, and decisions (even sub-
jective ones) must be made. With this in mind, you should apply the selection char-
acteristics to the list of potential SafeHome classes:
Potential Class
Characteristic Number That Applies
homeowner
rejected: 1, 2 fail even though 6 applies
sensor
accepted: all apply
control panel
accepted: all apply
installation
rejected
system (alias security function)
accepted: all apply
number, type
rejected: 3 fails, attributes of sensor
master password
rejected: 3 fails
telephone number
rejected: 3 fails
sensor event
accepted: all apply
audible alarm
accepted: 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 apply
monitoring service
rejected: 1, 2 fail even though 6 applies
It should be noted that (1) the preceding list is not all-inclusive, additional classes
would have to be added to complete the model; (2) some of the rejected potential
classes will become attributes for those classes that were accepted (e.g., number and
type are attributes of Sensor, and master password and telephone number may become
attributes of System); (3) different statements of the problem might cause different
“accept or reject” decisions to be made (e.g., if each homeowner had an individual
password or was identified by voice print, the Homeowner class would satisfy char-
acteristics 1 and 2 and would have been accepted).
uote:
“Classes struggle,
some classes
triumph, others are
eliminated.”
Mao Zedong

6.5.2
Specifying Attributes
Attributes describe a class that has been selected for inclusion in the requirements
model. In essence, it is the attributes that define the class—that clarify what is
meant by the class in the context of the problem space. For example, if we were to
build a system that tracks baseball statistics for professional baseball players, the
attributes of the class Player would be quite different than the attributes of the
same class when it is used in the context of the professional baseball pension sys-
tem. In the former, attributes such as name, position, batting average, fielding percentage,
years played, and games played might be relevant. For the latter, some of these attrib-
utes would be meaningful, but others would be replaced (or augmented) by attrib-
utes like average salary, credit toward full vesting, pension plan options chosen, mailing
address, and the like.
To develop a meaningful set of attributes for an analysis class, you should study
each use case and select those “things” that reasonably “belong” to the class. In ad-
dition, the following question should be answered for each class: “What data items
(composite and/or elementary) fully define this class in the context of the problem
at hand?”
To illustrate, we consider the System class defined for SafeHome. A homeowner
can configure the security function to reflect sensor information, alarm response
information, activation/deactivation information, identification information, and so
forth. We can represent these composite data items in the following manner:
identification information  system ID  verification phone number  system status
alarm response information  delay time  telephone number
activation/deactivation information  master password  number of allowable tries 
temporary password
Each of the data items to the right of the equal sign could be further defined to an
elementary level, but for our purposes, they constitute a reasonable list of attributes
for the System class (shaded portion of Figure 6.9).
Sensors are part of the overall SafeHome system, and yet they are not listed as
data items or as attributes in Figure 6.9. Sensor has already been defined as a class,
and multiple Sensor objects will be associated with the System class. In general,
we avoid defining an item as an attribute if more than one of the items is to be as-
sociated with the class.
6.5.3
Defining Operations
Operations define the behavior of an object. Although many different types of oper-
ations exist, they can generally be divided into four broad categories: (1) operations
that manipulate data in some way (e.g., adding, deleting, reformatting, selecting), 
(2) operations that perform a computation, (3) operations that inquire about the state
CHAPTER 6
REQUIREMENTS MODELING: SCENARIOS, INFORMATION, AND ANALYSIS CLASSES 171
Attributes are the set
of data objects that
fully define the class
within the context of
the problem.
When you define
operations for an
analysis class, focus on
problem-oriented
behavior rather than
behaviors required for
implementation.

172
PART TWO
MODELING
of an object, and (4) operations that monitor an object for the occurrence of a con-
trolling event. These functions are accomplished by operating on attributes and/or
associations (Section 6.5.5). Therefore, an operation must have “knowledge” of the
nature of the class’ attributes and associations.
As a first iteration at deriving a set of operations for an analysis class, you can
again study a processing narrative (or use case) and select those operations that rea-
sonably belong to the class. To accomplish this, the grammatical parse is again stud-
ied and verbs are isolated. Some of these verbs will be legitimate operations and can
be easily connected to a specific class. For example, from the SafeHome processing
narrative presented earlier in this chapter, we see that “sensor is assigned a number
and type” or “a master password is programmed for arming and disarming the
system.” These phrases indicate a number of things:
• That an assign() operation is relevant for the Sensor class.
• That a program() operation will be applied to the System class.
• That arm() and disarm() are operations that apply to System class.
Upon further investigation, it is likely that the operation program() will be divided into
a number of more specific suboperations required to configure the system. For ex-
ample, program() implies specifying phone numbers, configuring system character-
istics (e.g., creating the sensor table, entering alarm characteristics), and entering
password(s). But for now, we specify program() as a single operation.
In addition to the grammatical parse, you can gain additional insight into other
operations by considering the communication that occurs between objects. Objects
communicate by passing messages to one another. Before continuing with the spec-
ification of operations, I explore this matter in a bit more detail.
System
program( )
display( ) 
reset( ) 
query( ) 
arm( ) 
disarm( ) 
systemID
verificationPhoneNumber
systemStatus
delayTime
telephoneNumber
masterPassword
temporaryPassword
numberTries       
FIGURE 6.9
Class diagram
for the system
class

CHAPTER 6
REQUIREMENTS MODELING: SCENARIOS, INFORMATION, AND ANALYSIS CLASSES 173
Class Models
The scene: Ed’s cubicle, as
requirements modeling begins.
The players: Jamie, Vinod, and Ed—all members of
the SafeHome software engineering team.
The conversation:
[Ed has been working to extract classes from the use case
template for ACS-DCV (presented in an earlier sidebar in
this chapter) and is presenting the classes he has
extracted to his colleagues.]
Ed: So when the homeowner wants to pick a camera, he
or she has to pick it from a floor plan. I’ve defined a
FloorPlan class. Here’s the diagram.
(They look at Figure 6.10.)
Jamie: So FloorPlan is an object that is put together
with walls, doors, windows, and cameras. That’s what
those labeled lines mean, right?
Ed: Yeah, they’re called “associations.” One class is
associated with another according to the associations I’ve
shown. [Associations are discussed in Section 6.5.5.]
Vinod: So the actual floor plan is made up of walls and
contains cameras and sensors that are placed within
those walls. How does the floor plan know where to put
those objects?
Ed: It doesn’t, but the other classes do. See the attributes
under, say, WallSegment, which is used to build a
wall. The wall segment has start and stop coordinates and
the draw() operation does the rest.
Jamie: And the same goes for windows and doors.
Looks like camera has a few extra attributes.
Ed: Yeah, I need them to provide pan and zoom 
info.
Vinod: I have a question. Why does the camera have
an ID but the others don’t? I notice you have an attribute
called nextWall. How will WallSegment know what the
next wall will be?
Ed: Good question, but as they say, that’s a design
decision, so I’m going to delay that until . . .
Jamie: Give me a break . . . I’ll bet you’ve already
figured it out.
Ed (smiling sheepishly): True, I’m gonna use a list
structure which I’ll model when we get to design. If you
get religious about separating analysis and design, the
level of detail I have right here could be suspect.
Jamie: Looks pretty good to me, but I have a few more
questions.
(Jamie asks questions which result in minor modifications)
Vinod: Do you have CRC cards for each of the objects?
If so, we ought to role-play through them, just to make
sure nothing has been omitted.
Ed: I’m not quite sure how to do them.
Vinod: It’s not hard and they really pay off. I’ll show
you.
SAFEHOME
6.5.4
Class-Responsibility-Collaborator (CRC) Modeling
Class-responsibility-collaborator (CRC) modeling [Wir90] provides a simple means
for identifying and organizing the classes that are relevant to system or product
requirements. Ambler [Amb95] describes CRC modeling in the following way:
A CRC model is really a collection of standard index cards that represent classes. The
cards are divided into three sections. Along the top of the card you write the name of the
class. In the body of the card you list the class responsibilities on the left and the collab-
orators on the right.
In reality, the CRC model may make use of actual or virtual index cards. The intent is
to develop an organized representation of classes. Responsibilities are the attributes
and operations that are relevant for the class. Stated simply, a responsibility is
“anything the class knows or does” [Amb95]. Collaborators are those classes that are
uote:
“One purpose of
CRC cards is to fail
early, to fail often,
and to fail
inexpensively. It is
a lot cheaper to
tear up a bunch of
cards than it would
be to reorganize a
large amount of
source code.”
C. Horstmann

174
PART TWO
MODELING
required to provide a class with the information needed to complete a responsibility.
In general, a collaboration implies either a request for information or a request for
some action.
A simple CRC index card for the FloorPlan class is illustrated in Figure 6.11. The
list of responsibilities shown on the CRC card is preliminary and subject to additions
or modification. The classes Wall and Camera are noted next to the responsibility
that will require their collaboration.
Classes.
Basic guidelines for identifying classes and objects were presented
earlier in this chapter. The taxonomy of class types presented in Section 6.5.1 can be
extended by considering the following categories:
• Entity classes, also called model or business classes, are extracted directly
from the statement of the problem (e.g., FloorPlan and Sensor). These
FloorPlan
determineType( ) 
positionFloorplan( ) 
scale( ) 
change color( ) 
type 
name 
outsideDimensions 
Camera
determineType( )  
translateLocation( ) 
displayID( ) 
displayView( ) 
displayZoom( )  
type 
ID 
location 
fieldView 
panAngle 
ZoomSetting 
WallSegment
type 
startCoordinates 
stopCoordinates 
nextWallSement 
determineType( ) 
draw( )  
Window
type 
startCoordinates 
stopCoordinates 
nextWindow 
determineType( ) 
draw( )  
Is placed within
Wall
type 
wallDimensions  
determineType( ) 
computeDimensions ( )
Door
type 
startCoordinates 
stopCoordinates 
nextDoor
determineType( ) 
draw( )  
Is part of
Is used to build
Is used to build
Is used to build
FIGURE 6.10
Class diagram
for FloorPlan
(see sidebar
discussion)
WebRef
An excellent discussion
of these class types
can be found at
www.theumlcafe
.com/a0079.htm.

classes typically represent things that are to be stored in a database and
persist throughout the duration of the application (unless they are specifically
deleted).
• Boundary classes are used to create the interface (e.g., interactive screen or
printed reports) that the user sees and interacts with as the software is used.
Entity objects contain information that is important to users, but they do not
display themselves. Boundary classes are designed with the responsibility of
managing the way entity objects are represented to users. For example, a
boundary class called CameraWindow would have the responsibility of
displaying surveillance camera output for the SafeHome system.
• Controller classes manage a “unit of work” [UML03] from start to finish. That
is, controller classes can be designed to manage (1) the creation or update of
entity objects, (2) the instantiation of boundary objects as they obtain infor-
mation from entity objects, (3) complex communication between sets of
objects, (4) validation of data communicated between objects or between the
user and the application. In general, controller classes are not considered
until the design activity has begun.
Responsibilities.
Basic guidelines for identifying responsibilities (attributes and
operations) have been presented in Sections 6.5.2 and 6.5.3. Wirfs-Brock and her
colleagues [Wir90] suggest five guidelines for allocating responsibilities to classes:
1.
System intelligence should be distributed across classes to best
address the needs of the problem. Every application encompasses a
certain degree of intelligence; that is, what the system knows and what it
can do. This intelligence can be distributed across classes in a number of
CHAPTER 6
REQUIREMENTS MODELING: SCENARIOS, INFORMATION, AND ANALYSIS CLASSES 175
Class:
Des
R e s
Co llabo rat o r:
Class:
De
Co llabo rat o r:
Class:
D
Co llabo rat o r:
Class: FloorPlan
Description
Responsibility:
Collaborator:
Incorporates walls, doors, and windows
Shows position of video cameras
Defines floor plan name/type
Manages floor plan positioning
Scales floor plan for display
Scales floor plan for display
Wall
Camera
FIGURE 6.11
A CRC model
index card
uote:
“Objects can be
classified
scientifically into
three major
categories: those
that don’t work,
those that break
down, and those
that get lost.”
Russell Baker
What
guidelines
can be applied
for allocating
responsibilities
to classes?
?

176
PART TWO
MODELING
different ways. “Dumb” classes (those that have few responsibilities) can
be modeled to act as servants to a few “smart” classes (those having many
responsibilities). Although this approach makes the flow of control in a
system straightforward, it has a few disadvantages: it concentrates all intelli-
gence within a few classes, making changes more difficult, and it tends to
require more classes, hence more development effort.
If system intelligence is more evenly distributed across the classes in an
application, each object knows about and does only a few things (that are
generally well focused), the cohesiveness of the system is improved.17 This
enhances the maintainability of the software and reduces the impact of side
effects due to change.
To determine whether system intelligence is properly distributed, the re-
sponsibilities noted on each CRC model index card should be evaluated to
determine if any class has an extraordinarily long list of responsibilities. This
indicates a concentration of intelligence.18 In addition, the responsibilities for
each class should exhibit the same level of abstraction. For example, among
the operations listed for an aggregate class called CheckingAccount a re-
viewer notes two responsibilities: balance-the-account and check-off-cleared-
checks. The first operation (responsibility) implies a complex mathematical
and logical procedure. The second is a simple clerical activity. Since these
two operations are not at the same level of abstraction, check-off-cleared-
checks should be placed within the responsibilities of CheckEntry, a class
that is encompassed by the aggregate class CheckingAccount.
2.
Each responsibility should be stated as generally as possible. This
guideline implies that general responsibilities (both attributes and operations)
should reside high in the class hierarchy (because they are generic, they will
apply to all subclasses).
3.
Information and the behavior related to it should reside within the
same class. This achieves the object-oriented principle called encapsulation.
Data and the processes that manipulate the data should be packaged as a
cohesive unit.
4.
Information about one thing should be localized with a single class,
not distributed across multiple classes. A single class should take on
the responsibility for storing and manipulating a specific type of information.
This responsibility should not, in general, be shared across a number of
classes. If information is distributed, software becomes more difficult to
maintain and more challenging to test.
17 Cohesiveness is a design concept that is discussed in Chapter 8.
18 In such cases, it may be necessary to spit the class into multiple classes or complete subsystems in
order to distribute intelligence more effectively.

5.
Responsibilities should be shared among related classes, when
appropriate. There are many cases in which a variety of related objects
must all exhibit the same behavior at the same time. As an example, consider
a video game that must display the following classes: Player, PlayerBody,
PlayerArms, PlayerLegs, PlayerHead. Each of these classes has its own
attributes (e.g., position, orientation, color, speed) and all must be updated and
displayed as the user manipulates a joystick. The responsibilities update()
and display() must therefore be shared by each of the objects noted. Player
knows when something has changed and update() is required. It collaborates
with the other objects to achieve a new position or orientation, but each
object controls its own display.
Collaborations.
Classes fulfill their responsibilities in one of two ways: (1) A class
can use its own operations to manipulate its own attributes, thereby fulfilling a par-
ticular responsibility, or (2) a class can collaborate with other classes. Wirfs-Brock
and her colleagues [Wir90] define collaborations in the following way:
Collaborations represent requests from a client to a server in fulfillment of a client
responsibility. A collaboration is the embodiment of the contract between the client and
the server. . . . We say that an object collaborates with another object if, to fulfill a
responsibility, it needs to send the other object any messages. A single collaboration
flows in one direction—representing a request from the client to the server. From the
client’s point of view, each of its collaborations is associated with a particular responsi-
bility implemented by the server.
Collaborations are identified by determining whether a class can fulfill each respon-
sibility itself. If it cannot, then it needs to interact with another class. Hence, a
collaboration.
As an example, consider the SafeHome security function. As part of the activa-
tion procedure, the ControlPanel object must determine whether any sensors
are open. A responsibility named determine-sensor-status() is defined. If sensors are
open, ControlPanel must set a status attribute to “not ready.” Sensor information
can be acquired from each Sensor object. Therefore, the responsibility determine-
sensor-status() can be fulfilled only if ControlPanel works in collaboration with
Sensor.
To help in the identification of collaborators, you can examine three different
generic relationships between classes [Wir90]: (1) the is-part-of relationship, (2) the
has-knowledge-of relationship, and (3) the depends-upon relationship. Each of the
three generic relationships is considered briefly in the paragraphs that follow.
All classes that are part of an aggregate class are connected to the aggregate class
via an is-part-of relationship. Consider the classes defined for the video game noted
earlier, the class PlayerBody is-part-of Player, as are PlayerArms, PlayerLegs,
and PlayerHead. In UML, these relationships are represented as the aggregation
shown in Figure 6.12.
CHAPTER 6
REQUIREMENTS MODELING: SCENARIOS, INFORMATION, AND ANALYSIS CLASSES 177

178
PART TWO
MODELING
When one class must acquire information from another class, the has-knowledge-
of relationship is established. The determine-sensor-status() responsibility noted ear-
lier is an example of a has-knowledge-of relationship.
The depends-upon relationship implies that two classes have a dependency that
is not achieved by has-knowledge-of or is-part-of. For example, PlayerHead must
always be connected to PlayerBody (unless the video game is particularly violent),
yet each object could exist without direct knowledge of the other. An attribute of the
PlayerHead object called center-position is determined from the center position of
PlayerBody. This information is obtained via a third object, Player, that acquires it
from PlayerBody. Hence, PlayerHead depends-upon PlayerBody.
In all cases, the collaborator class name is recorded on the CRC model index card
next to the responsibility that has spawned the collaboration. Therefore, the index
card contains a list of responsibilities and the corresponding collaborations that
enable the responsibilities to be fulfilled (Figure 6.11).
When a complete CRC model has been developed, stakeholders can review the
model using the following approach [Amb95]:
1.
All participants in the review (of the CRC model) are given a subset of the
CRC model index cards. Cards that collaborate should be separated (i.e., no
reviewer should have two cards that collaborate).
2.
All use-case scenarios (and corresponding use-case diagrams) should be
organized into categories.
3.
The review leader reads the use case deliberately. As the review leader
comes to a named object, she passes a token to the person holding the corre-
sponding class index card. For example, a use case for SafeHome contains
the following narrative:
The homeowner observes the SafeHome control panel to determine if the system is
ready for input. If the system is not ready, the homeowner must physically close 
Player
PlayerHead
PlayerBody
PlayerArms
PlayerLegs
FIGURE 6.12
A composite
aggregate
class

windows/doors so that the ready indicator is present. [A not-ready indicator implies
that a sensor is open, i.e., that a door or window is open.]
When the review leader comes to “control panel,” in the use case narrative,
the token is passed to the person holding the ControlPanel index card. The
phrase “implies that a sensor is open” requires that the index card contains a
responsibility that will validate this implication (the responsibility determine-
sensor-status() accomplishes this). Next to the responsibility on the index card
is the collaborator Sensor. The token is then passed to the Sensor object.
4.
When the token is passed, the holder of the Sensor card is asked to describe
the responsibilities noted on the card. The group determines whether one (or
more) of the responsibilities satisfies the use-case requirement.
5.
If the responsibilities and collaborations noted on the index cards cannot
accommodate the use case, modifications are made to the cards. This may
include the definition of new classes (and corresponding CRC index cards) or
the specification of new or revised responsibilities or collaborations on
existing cards.
This modus operandi continues until the use case is finished. When all use cases
have been reviewed, requirements modeling continues.
CHAPTER 6
REQUIREMENTS MODELING: SCENARIOS, INFORMATION, AND ANALYSIS CLASSES 179
CRC Models
The scene: Ed’s cubicle, as
requirements modeling begins.
The players: Vinod and Ed—members of the
SafeHome software engineering team.
The conversation:
[Vinod has decided to show Ed how to develop CRC cards
by showing him an example.]
Vinod: While you’ve been working on surveillance and
Jamie has been tied up with security, I’ve been working
on the home management function.
Ed: What’s the status of that? Marketing kept changing
its mind.
Vinod: Here’s the first-cut use case for the whole
function . . .  we’ve refined it a bit, but it should give you
an overall view . . .
Use case: SafeHome home management function.
Narrative: We want to use the home management
interface on a PC or an Internet connection to control
electronic devices that have wireless interface controllers. 
The system should allow me to turn specific lights on and
off, to control appliances that are connected to a wireless
interface, to set my heating and air conditioning system to
temperatures that I define. To do this, I want to select the
devices from a floor plan of the house. Each device must
be identified on the floor plan. As an optional feature, I
want to control all audiovisual devices—audio, television,
DVD, digital recorders, and so forth.
With a single selection, I want to be able to set the
entire house for various situations. One is home, another
is away, a third is overnight travel, and a fourth is
extended travel. All of these situations will have settings
that will be applied to all devices. In the overnight travel
and extended travel states, the system should turn lights
on and off at random intervals (to make it look like
someone is home) and control the heating and air
conditioning system. I should be able to override these
setting via the Internet with appropriate password
protection . . .
Ed: The hardware guys have got all the wireless
interfacing figured out?
SAFEHOME

180
PART TWO
MODELING
6.5.5
Associations and Dependencies
In many instances, two analysis classes are related to one another in some fashion,
much like two data objects may be related to one another (Section 6.4.3). In UML
these relationships are called associations. Referring back to Figure 6.10, the
FloorPlan class is defined by identifying a set of associations between FloorPlan
and two other classes, Camera and Wall. The class Wall is associated with
three classes that allow a wall to be constructed, WallSegment, Window,
and Door.
In some cases, an association may be further defined by indicating multiplicity. Re-
ferring to Figure 6.10, a Wall object is constructed from one or more WallSegment
objects. In addition, the Wall object may contain 0 or more Window objects and 0
or more Door objects. These multiplicity constraints are illustrated in Figure 6.13,
where “one or more” is represented using 1. .*, and “0 or more” by 0 . .*. In UML, the
asterisk indicates an unlimited upper bound on the range.19
Vinod (smiling): They’re working on it; say it’s no
problem. Anyway, I extracted a bunch of classes for
home management and we can use one as an example.
Let’s use the HomeManagementInterface class.
Ed: Okay . . . so the responsibilities are what . . . the
attributes and operations for the class and the
collaborations are the classes that the responsibilities
point to.
Vinod: I thought you didn’t understand CRC.
Ed: Maybe a little, but go ahead.
Vinod: So here’s my class definition for
HomeManagementInterface.
Attributes:
optionsPanel—contains info on buttons that enable user to
select functionality.
situationPanel—contains info on buttons that enable user
to select situation.
floorplan—same as surveillance object but this one
displays devices.
deviceIcons—info on icons representing lights,
appliances, HVAC, etc.
devicePanels—simulation of appliance or device control
panel; allows control.
Operations:
displayControl(), selectControl(), displaySituation(), select
situation(), accessFloorplan(), selectDeviceIcon(),
displayDevicePanel(), accessDevicePanel(), . . .
Class: HomeManagementInterface
Responsibility
Collaborator
displayControl()
OptionsPanel (class)
selectControl()
OptionsPanel (class)
displaySituation()
SituationPanel (class)
selectSituation()
SituationPanel (class)
accessFloorplan()
FloorPlan (class) . . . 
. . . 
Ed: So when the operation accessFloorplan() is invoked,
it collaborates with the FloorPlan object just like the one
we developed for surveillance. Wait, I have a description
of it here. (They look at Figure 6.10.)
Vinod: Exactly. And if we wanted to review the entire
class model, we could start with this index card, then go
to the collaborator’s index card, and from there to one of
the collaborator’s collaborators, and so on.
Ed: Good way to find omissions or errors.
Vinod: Yep.
An association defines
a relationship between
classes. Multiplicity
defines how many of
one class are related to
how many of another
class.
19 Other multiplicity relations—one to one, one to many, many to many, one to a specified range with
lower and upper limits, and others—may be indicated as part of an association.

In many instances, a client-server relationship exists between two analysis
classes. In such cases, a client class depends on the server class in some way and a
dependency relationship is established. Dependencies are defined by a stereotype. A
stereotype is an “extensibility mechanism” [Arl02] within UML that allows you to
define a special modeling element whose semantics are custom defined. In UML
stereotypes are represented in double angle brackets (e.g., <<stereotype>>).
As an illustration of a simple dependency within the SafeHome surveillance sys-
tem, a Camera object (in this case, the server class) provides a video image to a
DisplayWindow object (in this case, the client class). The relationship between
these two objects is not a simple association, yet a dependency association does
exist. In a use case written for surveillance (not shown), you learn that a special pass-
word must be provided in order to view specific camera locations. One way to
achieve this is to have Camera request a password and then grant permission to the
DisplayWindow to produce the video display. This can be represented as shown in
Figure 6.14 where <<access>> implies that the use of the camera output is controlled
by a special password.
CHAPTER 6
REQUIREMENTS MODELING: SCENARIOS, INFORMATION, AND ANALYSIS CLASSES 181
WallSegment
Window
Door
Wall
Is used to build
Is used to build
Is used to build
1..*
1
1
1
0..*
0..*
FIGURE 6.13
Multiplicity
Camera
DisplayWindow
{password}
<<access>>
FIGURE 6.14
Dependencies
What is a
stereotype?
?

182
PART TWO
MODELING
6.5.6
Analysis Packages
An important part of analysis modeling is categorization. That is, various elements
of the analysis model (e.g., use cases, analysis classes) are categorized in a manner
that packages them as a grouping—called an analysis package—that is given a rep-
resentative name.
To illustrate the use of analysis packages, consider the video game that I intro-
duced earlier. As the analysis model for the video game is developed, a large num-
ber of classes are derived. Some focus on the game environment—the visual scenes
that the user sees as the game is played. Classes such as Tree, Landscape, Road,
Wall, Bridge, Building, and VisualEffect might fall within this category. Others
focus on the characters within the game, describing their physical features, actions,
and constraints. Classes such as Player (described earlier), Protagonist, Antago-
nist, and SupportingRoles might be defined. Still others describe the rules of the
game—how a player navigates through the environment. Classes such as
RulesOfMovement and ConstraintsOnAction are candidates here. Many other
categories might exist. These classes can be grouped in analysis packages as shown
in Figure 6.15.
The plus sign preceding the analysis class name in each package indicates that
the classes have public visibility and are therefore accessible from other packages.
Although they are not shown in the figure, other symbols can precede an element
within a package. A minus sign indicates that an element is hidden from all other
packages and a # symbol indicates that an element is accessible only to packages
contained within a given package.
Environment
+Tree 
+Landscape 
+Road 
+Wall 
+Bridge 
+Building 
+VisualEffect 
+Scene 
Characters
+Player 
+Protagonist 
+Antagonist 
+SupportingRole
RulesOfTheGame
+RulesOfMovement 
+ConstraintsOnAction
Package name
FIGURE 6.15
Packages
A package is used to
assemble a collection
of related classes.

A
fter my discussion of use cases, data modeling, and class-based models
in Chapter 6, it’s reasonable to ask, “Aren’t those requirements modeling
representations enough?”
The only reasonable answer is, “That depends.”
For some types of software, the use case may be the only requirements mod-
eling representation that is required. For others, an object-oriented approach is
chosen and class-based models may be developed. But in other situations, com-
plex application requirements may demand an examination of how data objects
are transformed as they move through a system; how an application behaves as
a consequence of external events; whether existing domain knowledge can be
adapted to the current problem; or in the case of Web-based systems and appli-
cations, how content and functionality meld to provide an end user with the abil-
ity to successfully navigate a WebApp to achieve usage goals.
7.1 REQUIREMENTS MODELING STRATEGIES
One view of requirements modeling, called structured analysis, considers data and
the processes that transform the data as separate entities. Data objects are mod-
eled in a way that defines their attributes and relationships. Processes that
manipulate data objects are modeled in a manner that shows how they transform
data as data objects flow through the system. A second approach to analysis 
186
C H A P T E R
7
REQUIREMENTS MODELING: FLOW,
BEHAVIOR, PATTERNS, AND WEBAPPS
K E Y
C O N C E P T S
analysis 
patterns . . . . . .200
behavioral 
model . . . . . . .195
configuration 
model . . . . . . .211
content model . .207
control flow 
model . . . . . . .191
data flow 
model . . . . . . .188
functional 
model . . . . . . .210
interaction 
model . . . . . . .209
navigation 
modeling . . . . .212
process 
specification . . .192
sequence 
diagrams . . . . .197
WebApps . . . . .205
What is it? The requirements model
has many different dimensions. In
this chapter you’ll learn about flow-
oriented models, behavioral models, and the spe-
cial requirements analysis considerations that
come into play when WebApps are developed.
Each of these modeling representations supple-
ments the use cases, data models, and class-
based models discussed in Chapter 6.
Who does it? A software engineer (sometimes
called an “analyst”) builds the model using
requirements elicited from various stakeholders.
Q U I C K
L O O K
Why is it important? Your insight into software
requirements grows in direct proportion to the
number of different requirements modeling
dimensions. Although you may not have the
time, the resources, or the inclination to develop
every representation suggested in this chapter
and Chapter 6, recognize that each different
modeling approach provides you with a differ-
ent way of looking at the problem. As a conse-
quence, you (and other stakeholders) will be
better able to assess whether you’ve properly
specified what must be accomplished.

modeled, called object-oriented analysis, focuses on the definition of classes and the
manner in which they collaborate with one another to effect customer requirements.
Although the analysis model that we propose in this book combines features of
both approaches, software teams often choose one approach and exclude all repre-
sentations from the other. The question is not which is best, but rather, what com-
bination of representations will provide stakeholders with the best model of software
requirements and the most effective bridge to software design.
7.2
FLOW-ORIENTED MODELING
Although data flow-oriented modeling is perceived as an outdated technique by
some software engineers, it continues to be one of the most widely used require-
ments analysis notations in use today.1 Although the data flow diagram (DFD) and
related diagrams and information are not a formal part of UML, they can be used to
complement UML diagrams and provide additional insight into system requirements
and flow.
The DFD takes an input-process-output view of a system. That is, data objects
flow into the software, are transformed by processing elements, and resultant data
objects flow out of the software. Data objects are represented by labeled arrows, and
transformations are represented by circles (also called bubbles). The DFD is pre-
sented in a hierarchical fashion. That is, the first data flow model (sometimes called
a level 0 DFD or context diagram) represents the system as a whole. Subsequent data
flow diagrams refine the context diagram, providing increasing detail with each
subsequent level.
CHAPTER 7
REQUIREMENTS MODELING: FLOW, BEHAVIOR, PATTERNS, AND WEBAPPS
187
What are the steps? Flow-oriented modeling
provides an indication of how data objects are
transformed by processing functions. Behavioral
modeling depicts the states of the system and its
classes and the impact of events on these states.
Pattern-based modeling makes use of existing
domain knowledge to facilitate requirements
analysis. WebApp requirements models are
especially adapted for the representation of
content, interaction, function, and configuration-
related requirements.
What is the work product? A wide array of text-
based and diagrammatic forms may be chosen
for the requirements model. Each of these repre-
sentations provides a view of one or more of the
model elements.
How do I ensure that I’ve done it right?
Requirements modeling work products must be
reviewed for correctness, completeness, and
consistency. They must reflect the needs of all
stakeholders and establish a foundation from
which design can be conducted.
1
Data flow modeling is a core modeling activity in structured analysis.
Some will suggest that
the DFD is old-school
and it has no place in
modern practice. That’s
a view that excludes a
potentially useful mode
of representation at the
analysis level. If it can
help, use the DFD.

188
PART TWO
MODELING
7.2.1
Creating a Data Flow Model
The data flow diagram enables you to develop models of the information domain and
functional domain. As the DFD is refined into greater levels of detail, you perform an
implicit functional decomposition of the system. At the same time, the DFD refine-
ment results in a corresponding refinement of data as it moves through the processes
that embody the application.
A few simple guidelines can aid immeasurably during the derivation of a data flow
diagram: (1) the level 0 data flow diagram should depict the software/system as a
single bubble; (2) primary input and output should be carefully noted; (3) refinement
should begin by isolating candidate processes, data objects, and data stores to be
represented at the next level; (4) all arrows and bubbles should be labeled with
meaningful names; (5) information flow continuity must be maintained from level to
level,2 and (6) one bubble at a time should be refined. There is a natural tendency to
overcomplicate the data flow diagram. This occurs when you attempt to show too
much detail too early or represent procedural aspects of the software in lieu of
information flow.
To illustrate the use of the DFD and related notation, we again consider the
SafeHome security function. A level 0 DFD for the security function is shown in
Figure 7.1. The primary external entities (boxes) produce information for use by the
system and consume information generated by the system. The labeled arrows rep-
resent data objects or data object hierarchies. For example, user commands and
data encompasses all configuration commands, all activation/deactivation com-
mands, all miscellaneous interactions, and all data that are entered to qualify or
expand a command.
The level 0 DFD must now be expanded into a level 1 data flow model. But how
do we proceed? Following an approach suggested in Chapter 6, you should apply a
uote:
“The purpose of
data flow diagrams
is to provide a
semantic bridge
between users
and systems
developers.”
Kenneth Kozar
2
That is, the data objects that flow into the system or into any transformation at one level must be the
same data objects (or their constituent parts) that flow into the transformation at a more refined level.
Information flow
continuity must be
maintained as each
DFD level is refined.
This means that input
and output at one level
must be the same as
input and output at a
refined level.
Control
panel
User commands
and data
Sensors
Sensor
status
Control
panel
display
Telephone
line
Alarm
SafeHome
software
Display
information
Telephone
number tones
Alarm
type
FIGURE 7.1
Context-level
DFD for the
SafeHome
security
function

CHAPTER 7
REQUIREMENTS MODELING: FLOW, BEHAVIOR, PATTERNS, AND WEBAPPS
189
“grammatical parse” [Abb83] to the use case narrative that describes the context-level
bubble. That is, we isolate all nouns (and noun phrases) and verbs (and verb phrases)
in a SafeHome processing narrative derived during the first requirements gathering
meeting. Recalling the parsed processing narrative text presented in Section 6.5.1:
The SafeHome security function enables the homeowner to configure the security system
when it is installed, monitors all sensors connected to the security system, and interacts
with the homeowner through the Internet, a PC, or a control panel.
During installation, the SafeHome PC is used to program and configure the system.
Each sensor is assigned a number and type, a master password is programmed for arming
and disarming the system, and telephone number(s) are input for dialing when a sensor
event occurs.
When a sensor event is recognized, the software invokes an audible alarm attached to
the system. After a delay time that is specified by the homeowner during system configura-
tion activities, the software dials a telephone number of a monitoring service, provides
information about the location, reporting the nature of the event that has been detected. The
telephone number will be redialed every 20 seconds until telephone connection is obtained.
The homeowner receives security information via a control panel, the PC, or a browser,
collectively called an interface. The interface displays prompting messages and system
status information on the control panel, the PC, or the browser window. Homeowner in-
teraction takes the following form . . .
Referring to the grammatical parse, verbs are SafeHome processes and can be rep-
resented as bubbles in a subsequent DFD. Nouns are either external entities (boxes),
data or control objects (arrows), or data stores (double lines). From the discussion in
Chapter 6, recall that nouns and verbs can be associated with one another (e.g., each
sensor is assigned a number and type; therefore number and type are attributes of the
data object sensor). Therefore, by performing a grammatical parse on the process-
ing narrative for a bubble at any DFD level, you can generate much useful informa-
tion about how to proceed with the refinement to the next level. Using this
information, a level 1 DFD is shown in Figure 7.2. The context level process shown
in Figure 7.1 has been expanded into six processes derived from an examination of
the grammatical parse. Similarly, the information flow between processes at level 1
has been derived from the parse. In addition, information flow continuity is main-
tained between levels 0 and 1.
The processes represented at DFD level 1 can be further refined into lower levels.
For example, the process monitor sensors can be refined into a level 2 DFD as shown
in Figure 7.3. Note once again that information flow continuity has been maintained
between levels.
The refinement of DFDs continues until each bubble performs a simple function.
That is, until the process represented by the bubble performs a function that would
be easily implemented as a program component. In Chapter 8, I discuss a concept,
called cohesion, that can be used to assess the processing focus of a given function.
For now, we strive to refine DFDs until each bubble is “single-minded.”
The grammatical parse
is not foolproof, but it
can provide you with an
excellent jump start, if
you’re struggling to
define data objects and
the transforms that
operate on them.
Be certain that the
processing narrative
you intend to parse is
written at the same
level of abstraction
throughout.

190
PART TWO
MODELING
Configuration information
Read
sensors
Assess
against
setup
Configuration
data
Sensor ID,
type
Sensor
status
Generate
alarm
signal
Alarm
type
Alarm
data
Telephone
number
Dial
phone
Telephone
number tones
Format
for
display
Sensor
information
Sensor ID
type,
location
FIGURE 7.3
Level 2 DFD
that refines
the monitor
sensors process
Configuration information
Control
panel
Sensors
Control
panel
display
Telephone
line
Alarm
Interact
with
user
Configure
system
Activate/
deactivate
system
Process
password
Monitor
sensors
Display
messages
and status
User commands
and data
Password
Start
stop
Configure
request
Configuration
data
Configuration
data
Configuration
data
Valid ID msg.
A/d msg.
Sensor
status
Sensor
information
Alarm type
Telephone
number tones
Display
information
FIGURE 7.2
Level 1 DFD for
SafeHome
security
function

7.2.2
Creating a Control Flow Model
For some types of applications, the data model and the data flow diagram are all that
is necessary to obtain meaningful insight into software requirements. As I have al-
ready noted, however, a large class of applications are “driven” by events rather than
data, produce control information rather than reports or displays, and process infor-
mation with heavy concern for time and performance. Such applications require the
use of control flow modeling in addition to data flow modeling.
I have already noted that an event or control item is implemented as a Boolean value
(e.g., true or false, on or off, 1 or 0) or a discrete list of conditions (e.g., empty, jammed,
full). To select potential candidate events, the following guidelines are suggested:
• List all sensors that are “read” by the software.
• List all interrupt conditions.
• List all “switches” that are actuated by an operator.
• List all data conditions.
• Recalling the noun/verb parse that was applied to the processing narrative,
review all “control items” as possible control specification inputs/outputs.
• Describe the behavior of a system by identifying its states, identify how each
state is reached, and define the transitions between states.
• Focus on possible omissions—a very common error in specifying control; for
example, ask: “Is there any other way I can get to this state or exit from it?”
Among the many events and control items that are part of SafeHome software are
sensor event (i.e., a sensor has been tripped), blink flag (a signal to blink the
display), and start/stop switch (a signal to turn the system on or off).
7.2.3
The Control Specification
A control specification (CSPEC) represents the behavior of the system (at the level
from which it has been referenced) in two different ways.3 The CSPEC contains a
state diagram that is a sequential specification of behavior. It can also contain a pro-
gram activation table—a combinatorial specification of behavior.
Figure 7.4 depicts a preliminary state diagram4 for the level 1 control flow model
for SafeHome. The diagram indicates how the system responds to events as it trav-
erses the four states defined at this level. By reviewing the state diagram, you can
determine the behavior of the system and, more important, ascertain whether there
are “holes” in the specified behavior.
For example, the state diagram (Figure 7.4) indicates that the transitions from
the Idle state can occur if the system is reset, activated, or powered off. If the system is
CHAPTER 7
REQUIREMENTS MODELING: FLOW, BEHAVIOR, PATTERNS, AND WEBAPPS
191
How do I
select
potential events
for a control flow
diagram, state
diagram, or
CSPEC?
?
3
Additional behavioral modeling notation is presented in Section 7.3.
4
The state diagram notation used here conforms to UML notation. A “state transition diagram” is avail-
able in structured analysis, but the UML format is superior in information content and representation.

192
PART TWO
MODELING
activated (i.e., alarm system is turned on), a transition to the Monitoring-
SystemStatus state occurs, display messages are changed as shown, and the pro-
cess monitorAndControlSystem is invoked. Two transitions occur out of the
MonitoringSystemStatus state—(1) when the system is deactivated, a transition oc-
curs back to the Idle state; (2) when a sensor is triggered into the ActingOnAlarm
state. All transitions and the content of all states are considered during the review.
A somewhat different mode of behavioral representation is the process activation
table. The PAT represents information contained in the state diagram in the context of
processes, not states. That is, the table indicates which processes (bubbles) in the flow
model will be invoked when an event occurs. The PAT can be used as a guide for a de-
signer who must build an executive that controls the processes represented at this
level. A PAT for the level 1 flow model of SafeHome software is shown in Figure 7.5.
The CSPEC describes the behavior of the system, but it gives us no information
about the inner working of the processes that are activated as a result of this behavior.
The modeling notation that provides this information is discussed in Section 7.2.4.
7.2.4
The Process Specification
The process specification (PSPEC) is used to describe all flow model processes that
appear at the final level of refinement. The content of the process specification can
Resetting
Entry/set systemStatus "inactive"
Entry/set displayMsg1 "Starting system"
Entry/set displayMsg2 "Please wait"
Entry/set displayStatus slowBlinking
Do: run diagnostics
Start/stop switch
power "on"
systemOK
Idle
Entry/set systemStatus "inactive"
Entry/set displayMsg1 "Ready"
Entry/set displayMsg2  ""
Entry/set displayStatus steady
KeyHit/handleKey 
failureDetected/
set displayMsg2 "contact Vendor"
MonitoringSystemStatus
Entry/set systemStatus "monitoring"
Entry/set displayMsg1 "Armed"
Entry/set displayMsg2   ""
Entry/set displayStatus steady
Do: monitorAndControlSystem
KeyHit/handleKey
ActingOnAlarm
Entry/set systemStatus "monitorAndAlarm"
Entry/set displayMsg1 "ALARM"
Entry/set displayMsg2 triggeringSensor
Entry/set displayStatus fastBlinking
Do: monitorAndControlSystem
Do: soundAlarm
Do: notifyAlarmResponders
KeyHit/handleKey     
Reset
falseAlarm
timeOut
sensorTriggered/
startTimer
sensorTriggered/
restartTimer
Activate
deactivatePassword
off/powerOff
deactivatePassword
FIGURE 7.4
State diagram for SafeHome security function

CHAPTER 7
REQUIREMENTS MODELING: FLOW, BEHAVIOR, PATTERNS, AND WEBAPPS
193
input events
process activation
monitor and control system         0     1     0     0     1     1
activate/deactivate system         0     1     0     0     0     0
display messages and status       1     0     1     1     1     1
interact with user                       1     0     0     1     0     1
sensor event                             0     0     0     0     1     0
blink flag                                 0     0     1     1     0     0
start stop switch                        0     1     0     0     0     0
display action status complete     0     0     0     1     0     0
in-progress                               0     0     1     0     0     0
time out                                   0     0     0     0     0     1
output
alarm signal                             0     0     0     0     1     0
FIGURE 7.5
Process activa-
tion table for
SafeHome
security
function
Data Flow Modeling
The scene: Jamie’s cubicle, after the
last requirements gathering meeting has concluded.
The players: Jamie, Vinod, and Ed—all members of
the SafeHome software engineering team.
The conversation:
(Jamie has sketched out the models shown in Figures 7.1
through 7.5 and is showing them to Ed and Vinod.)
Jamie: I took a software engineering course in college,
and they taught us this stuff. The Prof said it’s a bit old-
fashioned, but you know what, it helps me to clarify
things.
Ed: That’s cool. But I don’t see any classes or objects here.
Jamie: No . . . this is just a flow model with a little
behavioral stuff thrown in.
Vinod: So these DFDs represent an I-P-O view of the
software, right.
Ed: I-P-O?
Vinod: Input-process-output. The DFDs are actually
pretty intuitive . . . if you look at ‘em for a moment, they
show how data objects flow through the system and get
transformed as they go.
Ed: Looks like we could convert every bubble into an
executable component . . . at least at the lowest level of
the DFD.
Jamie: That’s the cool part, you can. In fact, there’s a
way to translate the DFDs into an design architecture.
Ed: Really?
Jamie: Yeah, but first we’ve got to develop a complete
requirements model and this isn’t it.
Vinod: Well, it’s a first step, but we’re going to have to
address class-based elements and also behavioral aspects,
although the state diagram and PAT does some of that.
Ed: We’ve got a lot work to do and not much time to do it.
(Doug—the software engineering manager—walks into the
cubical.)
Doug: So the next few days will be spent developing the
requirements model, huh?
Jamie (looking proud): We’ve already begun.
Doug: Good, we’ve got a lot of work to do and not
much time to do it.
(The three software engineers look at one another and smile.)
SAFEHOME

194
PART TWO
MODELING
include narrative text, a program design language (PDL) description5 of the process
algorithm, mathematical equations, tables, or UML activity diagrams. By providing a
PSPEC to accompany each bubble in the flow model, you can create a “mini-spec” that
serves as a guide for design of the software component that will implement the bubble.
To illustrate the use of the PSPEC, consider the process password transform repre-
sented in the flow model for SafeHome (Figure 7.2). The PSPEC for this function might
take the form:
PSPEC: process password (at control panel). The process password transform per-
forms password validation at the control panel for the SafeHome security function. Process
password receives a four-digit password from the interact with user function. The password
is first compared to the master password stored within the system. If the master password
matches, <valid id message = true> is passed to the message and status display function. If
the master password does not match, the four digits are compared to a table of secondary
passwords (these may be assigned to house guests and/or workers who require entry to
the home when the owner is not present). If the password matches an entry within the table,
<valid id message = true> is passed to the message and status display function. If there is no
match, <valid id message = false> is passed to the message and status display function.
If additional algorithmic detail is desired at this stage, a program design language
representation may also be included as part of the PSPEC. However, many believe
that the PDL version should be postponed until component design commences.
5
Program design language (PDL) mixes programming language syntax with narrative text to provide
procedural design detail. PDL is discussed briefly in Chapter 10.
6
Tools noted here do not represent an endorsement, but rather a sampling of tools in this category.
In most cases, tool names are trademarked by their respective developers.
The PSPEC is a “mini-
specification” for each
transform at the lowest
refined level of a DFD.
Structured Analysis
Objective: Structured analysis tools allow a
software engineer to create data models, flow
models, and behavioral models in a manner that enables
consistency and continuity checking and easy editing and
extension. Models created using these tools provide
the software engineer with insight into the analysis
representation and help to eliminate errors before they
propagate into design, or worse, into implementation itself.
Mechanics: Tools in this category use a “data
dictionary” as the central database for the description
of all data objects. Once entries in the dictionary are
defined, entity-relationship diagrams can be created
and object hierarchies can be developed. Data flow
diagramming features allow easy creation of this graphical
model and also provide features for the creation of PSPECs
and CSPECs. Analysis tools also enable the software 
engineer to create behavioral models using the state
diagram as the operative notation.
Representative Tools:6
MacA&D, WinA&D, developed by Excel software
(www.excelsoftware.com), provides a set of
simple and inexpensive analysis and design tools for
Macs and Windows machines.
MetaCASE Workbench, developed by MetaCase Consulting
(www.metacase.com), is a metatool used to define
an analysis or design method (including structured
analysis) and its concepts, rules, notations, and
generators.
System Architect, developed by Popkin Software
(www.popkin.com) provides a broad range of
analysis and design tools including tools for data
modeling and structured analysis.
SOFTWARE TOOLS

CHAPTER 7
REQUIREMENTS MODELING: FLOW, BEHAVIOR, PATTERNS, AND WEBAPPS
195
7.3
CREATING A BEHAVIORAL MODEL
The modeling notation that I have discussed to this point represents static elements
of the requirements model. It is now time to make a transition to the dynamic be-
havior of the system or product. To accomplish this, you can represent the behavior
of the system as a function of specific events and time.
The behavioral model indicates how software will respond to external events or
stimuli. To create the model, you should perform the following steps:
1.
Evaluate all use cases to fully understand the sequence of interaction within
the system.
2.
Identify events that drive the interaction sequence and understand how these
events relate to specific objects.
3.
Create a sequence for each use case.
4.
Build a state diagram for the system.
5.
Review the behavioral model to verify accuracy and consistency.
Each of these steps is discussed in the sections that follow.
7.3.1
Identifying Events with the Use Case
In Chapter 6 you learned that the use case represents a sequence of activities that in-
volves actors and the system. In general, an event occurs whenever the system and
an actor exchange information. In Section 7.2.3, I indicated that an event is not the
information that has been exchanged, but rather the fact that information has been
exchanged.
A use case is examined for points of information exchange. To illustrate, we re-
consider the use case for a portion of the SafeHome security function.
The homeowner uses the keypad to key in a four-digit password. The password is
compared with the valid password stored in the system. If the password is incorrect, the
control panel will beep once and reset itself for additional input. If the password is
correct, the control panel awaits further action.
The underlined portions of the use case scenario indicate events. An actor should be
identified for each event; the information that is exchanged should be noted, and any
conditions or constraints should be listed.
As an example of a typical event, consider the underlined use case phrase “home-
owner uses the keypad to key in a four-digit password.” In the context of the
requirements model, the object, Homeowner,7 transmits an event to the object
ControlPanel. The event might be called password entered. The information
How do I
model the
software’s
reaction to some
external event?
?
7
In this example, we assume that each user (homeowner) that interacts with SafeHome has an
identifying password and is therefore a legitimate object.

196
PART TWO
MODELING
transferred is the four digits that constitute the password, but this is not an essential
part of the behavioral model. It is important to note that some events have an ex-
plicit impact on the flow of control of the use case, while others have no direct im-
pact on the flow of control. For example, the event password entered does not
explicitly change the flow of control of the use case, but the results of the event
password compared (derived from the interaction “password is compared with the
valid password stored in the system”) will have an explicit impact on the information
and control flow of the SafeHome software.
Once all events have been identified, they are allocated to the objects involved.
Objects can be responsible for generating events (e.g., Homeowner generates
the password entered event) or recognizing events that have occurred elsewhere
(e.g., ControlPanel recognizes the binary result of the password compared event).
7.3.2
State Representations
In the context of behavioral modeling, two different characterizations of states must
be considered: (1) the state of each class as the system performs its function and
(2) the state of the system as observed from the outside as the system performs its
function.8
The state of a class takes on both passive and active characteristics [Cha93]. A
passive state is simply the current status of all of an object’s attributes. For example,
the passive state of the class Player (in the video game application discussed in
Chapter 6) would include the current position and orientation attributes of Player as
well as other features of Player that are relevant to the game (e.g., an attribute that
indicates magic wishes remaining). The active state of an object indicates the current sta-
tus of the object as it undergoes a continuing transformation or processing. The class
Player might have the following active states: moving, at rest, injured, being cured;
trapped, lost, and so forth. An event (sometimes called a trigger) must occur to force
an object to make a transition from one active state to another.
Two different behavioral representations are discussed in the paragraphs that
follow. The first indicates how an individual class changes state based on external
events and the second shows the behavior of the software as a function of time.
State diagrams for analysis classes.
One component of a behavioral model is
a UML state diagram9 that represents active states for each class and the events (trig-
gers) that cause changes between these active states. Figure 7.6 illustrates a state di-
agram for the ControlPanel object in the SafeHome security function.
Each arrow shown in Figure 7.6 represents a transition from one active state of
an object to another. The labels shown for each arrow represent the event that
8
The state diagrams presented in Chapter 6 and in Section 7.3.2 depict the state of the system. Our
discussion in this section will focus on the state of each class within the analysis model.
9
If you are unfamiliar with UML, a brief introduction to this important modeling notation is presented
in Appendix 1.
The system has states
that represent specific
externally observable
behavior; a class has
states that represent
its behavior as the
system performs its
functions.

triggers the transition. Although the active state model provides useful insight into
the “life history” of an object, it is possible to specify additional information to pro-
vide more depth in understanding the behavior of an object. In addition to specify-
ing the event that causes the transition to occur, you can specify a guard and an
action [Cha93]. A guard is a Boolean condition that must be satisfied in order for the
transition to occur. For example, the guard for the transition from the “reading” state
to the “comparing” state in Figure 7.6 can be determined by examining the use case:
if (password input  4 digits) then compare to stored password
In general, the guard for a transition usually depends upon the value of one or more
attributes of an object. In other words, the guard depends on the passive state of the
object.
An action occurs concurrently with the state transition or as a consequence of it
and generally involves one or more operations (responsibilities) of the object. For ex-
ample, the action connected to the password entered event (Figure 7.6) is an opera-
tion named validatePassword() that accesses a password object and performs a
digit-by-digit comparison to validate the entered password.
Sequence diagrams.
The second type of behavioral representation, called a
sequence diagram in UML, indicates how events cause transitions from object to
object. Once events have been identified by examining a use case, the modeler
CHAPTER 7
REQUIREMENTS MODELING: FLOW, BEHAVIOR, PATTERNS, AND WEBAPPS
197
Reading
Locked
Selecting
Password
entered 
Comparing
Password = incorrect
& numberOfTries < maxTries 
Password = correct
Activation successful
Key hit
Do: validatePassword
numberOfTries > maxTries
Timer ≤ lockedTime
Timer > lockedTime
FIGURE 7.6
State diagram
for the 
ControlPanel
class

198
PART TWO
MODELING
creates a sequence diagram—a representation of how events cause flow from one
object to another as a function of time. In essence, the sequence diagram is a short-
hand version of the use case. It represents key classes and the events that cause
behavior to flow from class to class.
Figure 7.7 illustrates a partial sequence diagram for the SafeHome security func-
tion. Each of the arrows represents an event (derived from a use case) and indicates
how the event channels behavior between SafeHome objects. Time is measured ver-
tically (downward), and the narrow vertical rectangles represent time spent in pro-
cessing an activity. States may be shown along a vertical time line.
The first event, system ready, is derived from the external environment and chan-
nels behavior to the Homeowner object. The homeowner enters a password. A
request lookup event is passed to System, which looks up the password in a simple
database and returns a result (found or not found) to ControlPanel (now in the
comparing state). A valid password results in a password=correct event to System,
which activates Sensors with a request activation event. Ultimately, control is passed
back to the homeowner with the activation successful event.
Once a complete sequence diagram has been developed, all of the events that
cause transitions between system objects can be collated into a set of input events
and output events (from an object). This information is useful in the creation of an
effective design for the system to be built.
Unlike a state diagram
that represents
behavior without
noting the classes
involved, a sequence
diagram represents
behavior, by describing
how classes move
from state to state.
Control panel
System
System 
ready
Reading
Request lookup
Comparing
Result
Password entered
Password = correct
Request activation
Activation successful
Locked
Selecting
Timer > lockedTime
A
A
Activation successful
Homeowner
Sensors
numberOfTries > maxTries
FIGURE 7.7
Sequence diagram (partial) for the SafeHome security function
