SUMMARY
The reincarnation of virtual machines (VMs) presents a great opportunity for parallel, cluster, grid,
cloud, and distributed computing. Virtualization technology benefits the computer and IT industries
by enabling users to share expensive hardware resources by multiplexing VMs on the same set of
hardware hosts. This chapter covers virtualization levels, VM architectures, virtual networking,
virtual cluster construction, and virtualized data-center design and automation in cloud computing.
In particular, the designs of dynamically structured clusters, grids, and clouds are presented with
VMs and virtual clusters.
3.1 IMPLEMENTATION LEVELS OF VIRTUALIZATION
Virtualization is a computer architecture technology by which multiple virtual machines (VMs) are
multiplexed in the same hardware machine. The idea of VMs can be dated back to the 1960s [53].
The purpose of a VM is to enhance resource sharing by many users and improve computer perfor-
mance in terms of resource utilization and application flexibility. Hardware resources (CPU, mem-
ory, I/O devices, etc.) or software resources (operating system and software libraries) can be
virtualized in various functional layers. This virtualization technology has been revitalized as the
demand for distributed and cloud computing increased sharply in recent years [41].
The idea is to separate the hardware from the software to yield better system efficiency. For
example, computer users gained access to much enlarged memory space when the concept of virtual
memory was introduced. Similarly, virtualization techniques can be applied to enhance the use of
compute engines, networks, and storage. In this chapter we will discuss VMs and their applications
for building distributed systems. According to a 2009 Gartner Report, virtualization was the top
strategic technology poised to change the computer industry. With sufficient storage, any computer
platform can be installed in another host computer, even if they use processors with different
instruction sets and run with distinct operating systems on the same hardware.
3.1.1 Levels of Virtualization Implementation
A traditional computer runs with a host operating system specially tailored for its hardware architec-
ture, as shown in Figure 3.1(a). After virtualization, different user applications managed by their
own operating systems (guest OS) can run on the same hardware, independent of the host OS. This
is often done by adding additional software, called a virtualization layer as shown in Figure 3.1(b).
This virtualization layer is known as hypervisor or virtual machine monitor (VMM) [54]. The VMs
are shown in the upper boxes, where applications run with their own guest OS over the virtualized
CPU, memory, and I/O resources.
The main function of the software layer for virtualization is to virtualize the physical hardware
of a host machine into virtual resources to be used by the VMs, exclusively. This can be implemen-
ted at various operational levels, as we will discuss shortly. The virtualization software creates the
abstraction of VMs by interposing a virtualization layer at various levels of a computer system.
Common virtualization layers include the instruction set architecture (ISA) level, hardware level,
operating system level, library support level, and application level (see Figure 3.2).
130
CHAPTER 3 Virtual Machines and Virtualization of Clusters and Data Centers
MODULE 2

Application level
JVM / .NET CLR / Panot
WINE/ WABI/ LxRun / Visual MainWin / vCUDA
Jail / Virtual Environment / Ensim’s VPS / FVM
VMware / Virtual PC / Denali / Xen / L4 /
Plex 86 / User mode Linux / Cooperative Linux
Bochs / Crusoe / QEMU / BIRD / Dynamo
Operating system level
Library (user-level API) level
Hardware abstraction layer (HAL) level
Instruction set architecture (ISA) level
FIGURE 3.2
Virtualization ranging from hardware to applications in five abstraction levels.
Application
Host operating system
Hardware
Hardware running the Host OS
(a) Traditional computer
(b) After virtualization
Application
Guest OS
Application
Guest OS
Virtual
Machines
Virtualization layer (Hypervisor or VMM)
FIGURE 3.1
The architecture of a computer system before and after virtualization, where VMM stands for virtual machine
monitor.
3.1 Implementation Levels of Virtualization
131

3.1.1.1 Instruction Set Architecture Level
At the ISA level, virtualization is performed by emulating a given ISA by the ISA of the host
machine. For example, MIPS binary code can run on an x86-based host machine with the help of
ISA emulation. With this approach, it is possible to run a large amount of legacy binary code writ-
ten for various processors on any given new hardware host machine. Instruction set emulation leads
to virtual ISAs created on any hardware machine.
The basic emulation method is through code interpretation. An interpreter program interprets the
source instructions to target instructions one by one. One source instruction may require tens or
hundreds of native target instructions to perform its function. Obviously, this process is relatively
slow. For better performance, dynamic binary translation is desired. This approach translates basic
blocks of dynamic source instructions to target instructions. The basic blocks can also be extended
to program traces or super blocks to increase translation efficiency. Instruction set emulation
requires binary translation and optimization. A virtual instruction set architecture (V-ISA) thus
requires adding a processor-specific software translation layer to the compiler.
3.1.1.2 Hardware Abstraction Level
Hardware-level virtualization is performed right on top of the bare hardware. On the one hand, this
approach generates a virtual hardware environment for a VM. On the other hand, the process manages
the underlying hardware through virtualization. The idea is to virtualize a computer’s resources, such as
its processors, memory, and I/O devices. The intention is to upgrade the hardware utilization rate by
multiple users concurrently. The idea was implemented in the IBM VM/370 in the 1960s. More
recently, the Xen hypervisor has been applied to virtualize x86-based machines to run Linux or other
guest OS applications. We will discuss hardware virtualization approaches in more detail in Section 3.3.
3.1.1.3 Operating System Level
This refers to an abstraction layer between traditional OS and user applications. OS-level virtualiza-
tion creates isolated containers on a single physical server and the OS instances to utilize the hard-
ware and software in data centers. The containers behave like real servers. OS-level virtualization is
commonly used in creating virtual hosting environments to allocate hardware resources among a
large number of mutually distrusting users. It is also used, to a lesser extent, in consolidating server
hardware by moving services on separate hosts into containers or VMs on one server. OS-level
virtualization is depicted in Section 3.1.3.
3.1.1.4 Library Support Level
Most applications use APIs exported by user-level libraries rather than using lengthy system calls
by the OS. Since most systems provide well-documented APIs, such an interface becomes another
candidate for virtualization. Virtualization with library interfaces is possible by controlling the com-
munication link between applications and the rest of a system through API hooks. The software
tool WINE has implemented this approach to support Windows applications on top of UNIX hosts.
Another example is the vCUDA which allows applications executing within VMs to leverage GPU
hardware acceleration. This approach is detailed in Section 3.1.4.
3.1.1.5 User-Application Level
Virtualization at the application level virtualizes an application as a VM. On a traditional OS, an
application often runs as a process. Therefore, application-level virtualization is also known as
132
CHAPTER 3 Virtual Machines and Virtualization of Clusters and Data Centers

process-level virtualization. The most popular approach is to deploy high level language (HLL)
VMs. In this scenario, the virtualization layer sits as an application program on top of the operating
system, and the layer exports an abstraction of a VM that can run programs written and compiled
to a particular abstract machine definition. Any program written in the HLL and compiled for this
VM will be able to run on it. The Microsoft .NET CLR and Java Virtual Machine (JVM) are two
good examples of this class of VM.
Other forms of application-level virtualization are known as application isolation, application
sandboxing, or application streaming. The process involves wrapping the application in a layer that
is isolated from the host OS and other applications. The result is an application that is much easier
to distribute and remove from user workstations. An example is the LANDesk application virtuali-
zation platform which deploys software applications as self-contained, executable files in an isolated
environment without requiring installation, system modifications, or elevated security privileges.
3.1.1.6 Relative Merits of Different Approaches
Table 3.1 compares the relative merits of implementing virtualization at various levels. The column
headings correspond to four technical merits. “Higher Performance” and “Application Flexibility”
are self-explanatory. “Implementation Complexity” implies the cost to implement that particular vir-
tualization level. “Application Isolation” refers to the effort required to isolate resources committed
to different VMs. Each row corresponds to a particular level of virtualization.
The number of X’s in the table cells reflects the advantage points of each implementation level.
Five X’s implies the best case and one X implies the worst case. Overall, hardware and OS support
will yield the highest performance. However, the hardware and application levels are also the most
expensive to implement. User isolation is the most difficult to achieve. ISA implementation offers
the best application flexibility.
3.1.2 VMM Design Requirements and Providers
As mentioned earlier, hardware-level virtualization inserts a layer between real hardware and tradi-
tional operating systems. This layer is commonly called the Virtual Machine Monitor (VMM) and it
manages the hardware resources of a computing system. Each time programs access the hardware the
VMM captures the process. In this sense, the VMM acts as a traditional OS. One hardware compo-
nent, such as the CPU, can be virtualized as several virtual copies. Therefore, several traditional oper-
ating systems which are the same or different can sit on the same set of hardware simultaneously.
Table 3.1 Relative Merits of Virtualization at Various Levels (More “X”’s Means Higher Merit, with a
Maximum of 5 X’s)
Level of Implementation
Higher
Performance
Application
Flexibility
Implementation
Complexity
Application
Isolation
ISA
X
XXXXX
XXX
XXX
Hardware-level virtualization
XXXXX
XXX
XXXXX
XXXX
OS-level virtualization
XXXXX
XX
XXX
XX
Runtime library support
XXX
XX
XX
XX
User application level
XX
XX
XXXXX
XXXXX
3.1 Implementation Levels of Virtualization
133

There are three requirements for a VMM. First, a VMM should provide an environment for pro-
grams which is essentially identical to the original machine. Second, programs run in this environ-
ment should show, at worst, only minor decreases in speed. Third, a VMM should be in complete
control of the system resources. Any program run under a VMM should exhibit a function identical
to that which it runs on the original machine directly. Two possible exceptions in terms of differ-
ences are permitted with this requirement: differences caused by the availability of system resources
and differences caused by timing dependencies. The former arises when more than one VM is run-
ning on the same machine.
The hardware resource requirements, such as memory, of each VM are reduced, but the sum of
them is greater than that of the real machine installed. The latter qualification is required because of
the intervening level of software and the effect of any other VMs concurrently existing on the same
hardware. Obviously, these two differences pertain to performance, while the function a VMM pro-
vides stays the same as that of a real machine. However, the identical environment requirement
excludes the behavior of the usual time-sharing operating system from being classed as a VMM.
A VMM should demonstrate efficiency in using the VMs. Compared with a physical machine,
no one prefers a VMM if its efficiency is too low. Traditional emulators and complete software
interpreters (simulators) emulate each instruction by means of functions or macros. Such a method
provides the most flexible solutions for VMMs. However, emulators or simulators are too slow to
be used as real machines. To guarantee the efficiency of a VMM, a statistically dominant subset
of the virtual processor’s instructions needs to be executed directly by the real processor, with no
software intervention by the VMM. Table 3.2 compares four hypervisors and VMMs that are in
use today.
Complete control of these resources by a VMM includes the following aspects: (1) The VMM is
responsible for allocating hardware resources for programs; (2) it is not possible for a program to
access any resource not explicitly allocated to it; and (3) it is possible under certain circumstances
for a VMM to regain control of resources already allocated. Not all processors satisfy these require-
ments for a VMM. A VMM is tightly related to the architectures of processors. It is difficult to
Table 3.2 Comparison of Four VMM and Hypervisor Software Packages
Provider and
References
Host CPU
Host OS
Guest OS
Architecture
VMware
Workstation [71]
x86, x86-64
Windows,
Linux
Windows, Linux,
Solaris, FreeBSD,
Netware, OS/2, SCO,
BeOS, Darwin
Full Virtualization
VMware ESX
Server [71]
x86, x86-64
No host OS
The same as VMware
Workstation
Para-Virtualization
Xen [7,13,42]
x86, x86-64, IA-64
NetBSD,
Linux,
Solaris
FreeBSD, NetBSD,
Linux, Solaris,
Windows XP and
2003 Server
Hypervisor
KVM [31]
x86, x86-64, IA-64,
S390, PowerPC
Linux
Linux, Windows,
FreeBSD, Solaris
Para-Virtualization
134
CHAPTER 3 Virtual Machines and Virtualization of Clusters and Data Centers

implement a VMM for some types of processors, such as the x86. Specific limitations include the
inability to trap on some privileged instructions. If a processor is not designed to support virtualiza-
tion primarily, it is necessary to modify the hardware to satisfy the three requirements for a VMM.
This is known as hardware-assisted virtualization.
3.1.3 Virtualization Support at the OS Level
With the help of VM technology, a new computing mode known as cloud computing is emerging.
Cloud computing is transforming the computing landscape by shifting the hardware and staffing costs
of managing a computational center to third parties, just like banks. However, cloud computing has at
least two challenges. The first is the ability to use a variable number of physical machines and VM
instances depending on the needs of a problem. For example, a task may need only a single CPU dur-
ing some phases of execution but may need hundreds of CPUs at other times. The second challenge
concerns the slow operation of instantiating new VMs. Currently, new VMs originate either as fresh
boots or as replicates of a template VM, unaware of the current application state. Therefore, to better
support cloud computing, a large amount of research and development should be done.
3.1.3.1 Why OS-Level Virtualization?
As mentioned earlier, it is slow to initialize a hardware-level VM because each VM creates its own
image from scratch. In a cloud computing environment, perhaps thousands of VMs need to be initi-
alized simultaneously. Besides slow operation, storing the VM images also becomes an issue. As a
matter of fact, there is considerable repeated content among VM images. Moreover, full virtualiza-
tion at the hardware level also has the disadvantages of slow performance and low density, and the
need for para-virtualization to modify the guest OS. To reduce the performance overhead of
hardware-level virtualization, even hardware modification is needed. OS-level virtualization provides
a feasible solution for these hardware-level virtualization issues.
Operating system virtualization inserts a virtualization layer inside an operating system to
partition a machine’s physical resources. It enables multiple isolated VMs within a single operating
system kernel. This kind of VM is often called a virtual execution environment (VE), Virtual
Private System (VPS), or simply container. From the user’s point of view, VEs look like real ser-
vers. This means a VE has its own set of processes, file system, user accounts, network interfaces
with IP addresses, routing tables, firewall rules, and other personal settings. Although VEs can be
customized for different people, they share the same operating system kernel. Therefore, OS-level
virtualization is also called single-OS image virtualization. Figure 3.3 illustrates operating system
virtualization from the point of view of a machine stack.
3.1.3.2 Advantages of OS Extensions
Compared to hardware-level virtualization, the benefits of OS extensions are twofold: (1) VMs at the
operating system level have minimal startup/shutdown costs, low resource requirements, and high
scalability; and (2) for an OS-level VM, it is possible for a VM and its host environment to synchro-
nize state changes when necessary. These benefits can be achieved via two mechanisms of OS-level
virtualization: (1) All OS-level VMs on the same physical machine share a single operating system
kernel; and (2) the virtualization layer can be designed in a way that allows processes in VMs to
access as many resources of the host machine as possible, but never to modify them. In cloud
3.1 Implementation Levels of Virtualization
135

computing, the first and second benefits can be used to overcome the defects of slow initialization of
VMs at the hardware level, and being unaware of the current application state, respectively.
3.1.3.3 Disadvantages of OS Extensions
The main disadvantage of OS extensions is that all the VMs at operating system level on a single
container must have the same kind of guest operating system. That is, although different OS-level
VMs may have different operating system distributions, they must pertain to the same operating
system family. For example, a Windows distribution such as Windows XP cannot run on a
Linux-based container. However, users of cloud computing have various preferences. Some prefer
Windows and others prefer Linux or other operating systems. Therefore, there is a challenge for
OS-level virtualization in such cases.
Figure 3.3 illustrates the concept of OS-level virtualization. The virtualization layer is inserted
inside the OS to partition the hardware resources for multiple VMs to run their applications in
multiple virtual environments. To implement OS-level virtualization, isolated execution environ-
ments (VMs) should be created based on a single OS kernel. Furthermore, the access requests from
a VM need to be redirected to the VM’s local resource partition on the physical machine. For
Physical server (Hardware node) #1
Network
Hardware
Host operating system
OpenVZ templates
Virtual private server
root
user
user
Application
software
root
user
user
Application
software
Virtual private server
OpenVZ layer
FIGURE 3.3
The OpenVZ virtualization layer inside the host OS, which provides some OS images to create VMs quickly.
(Courtesy of OpenVZ User’s Guide [65] )
136
CHAPTER 3 Virtual Machines and Virtualization of Clusters and Data Centers

example, the chroot command in a UNIX system can create several virtual root directories within a
host OS. These virtual root directories are the root directories of all VMs created.
There are two ways to implement virtual root directories: duplicating common resources to each
VM partition; or sharing most resources with the host environment and only creating private
resource copies on the VM on demand. The first way incurs significant resource costs and overhead
on a physical machine. This issue neutralizes the benefits of OS-level virtualization, compared with
hardware-assisted virtualization. Therefore, OS-level virtualization is often a second choice.
3.1.3.4 Virtualization on Linux or Windows Platforms
By far, most reported OS-level virtualization systems are Linux-based. Virtualization support on the
Windows-based platform is still in the research stage. The Linux kernel offers an abstraction layer
to allow software processes to work with and operate on resources without knowing the hardware
details. New hardware may need a new Linux kernel to support. Therefore, different Linux plat-
forms use patched kernels to provide special support for extended functionality.
However, most Linux platforms are not tied to a special kernel. In such a case, a host can run
several VMs simultaneously on the same hardware. Table 3.3 summarizes several examples of OS-
level virtualization tools that have been developed in recent years. Two OS tools (Linux vServer
and OpenVZ) support Linux platforms to run other platform-based applications through virtualiza-
tion. These two OS-level tools are illustrated in Example 3.1. The third tool, FVM, is an attempt
specifically developed for virtualization on the Windows NT platform.
Example 3.1 Virtualization Support for the Linux Platform
OpenVZ is an OS-level tool designed to support Linux platforms to create virtual environments for running
VMs under different guest OSes. OpenVZ is an open source container-based virtualization solution built on
Linux. To support virtualization and isolation of various subsystems, limited resource management, and
checkpointing, OpenVZ modifies the Linux kernel. The overall picture of the OpenVZ system is illustrated
in Figure 3.3. Several VPSes can run simultaneously on a physical machine. These VPSes look like normal
Table 3.3 Virtualization Support for Linux and Windows NT Platforms
Virtualization Support and Source of
Information
Brief Introduction on Functionality and
Application Platforms
Linux vServer for Linux platforms (http://linux-
vserver.org/)
Extends Linux kernels to implement a security
mechanism to help build VMs by setting resource
limits and file attributes and changing the root
environment for VM isolation
OpenVZ for Linux platforms [65]; http://ftp.openvz
.org/doc/OpenVZ-Users-Guide.pdf)
Supports virtualization by creating virtual private
servers (VPSes); the VPS has its own files, users,
process tree, and virtual devices, which can be
isolated from other VPSes, and checkpointing and
live migration are supported
FVM (Feather-Weight Virtual Machines) for
virtualizing the Windows NT platforms [78])
Uses system call interfaces to create VMs at the NY
kernel space; multiple VMs are supported by
virtualized namespace and copy-on-write
3.1 Implementation Levels of Virtualization
137

Linux servers. Each VPS has its own files, users and groups, process tree, virtual network, virtual devices,
and IPC through semaphores and messages.
The resource management subsystem of OpenVZ consists of three components: two-level disk alloca-
tion, a two-level CPU scheduler, and a resource controller. The amount of disk space a VM can use is set
by the OpenVZ server administrator. This is the first level of disk allocation. Each VM acts as a standard
Linux system. Hence, the VM administrator is responsible for allocating disk space for each user and
group. This is the second-level disk quota. The first-level CPU scheduler of OpenVZ decides which VM to
give the time slice to, taking into account the virtual CPU priority and limit settings.
The second-level CPU scheduler is the same as that of Linux. OpenVZ has a set of about 20 parameters
which are carefully chosen to cover all aspects of VM operation. Therefore, the resources that a VM can use
are well controlled. OpenVZ also supports checkpointing and live migration. The complete state of a VM can
quickly be saved to a disk file. This file can then be transferred to another physical machine and the VM can
be restored there. It only takes a few seconds to complete the whole process. However, there is still a delay
in processing because the established network connections are also migrated.
3.1.4 Middleware Support for Virtualization
Library-level virtualization is also known as user-level Application Binary Interface (ABI) or API
emulation. This type of virtualization can create execution environments for running alien programs
on a platform rather than creating a VM to run the entire operating system. API call interception
and remapping are the key functions performed. This section provides an overview of several
library-level virtualization systems: namely the Windows Application Binary Interface (WABI),
lxrun, WINE, Visual MainWin, and vCUDA, which are summarized in Table 3.4.
Table 3.4 Middleware and Library Support for Virtualization
Middleware or Runtime Library and References or
Web Link
Brief Introduction and Application Platforms
WABI (http://docs.sun.com/app/docs/doc/802-6306)
Middleware that converts Windows system calls
running on x86 PCs to Solaris system calls
running on SPARC workstations
Lxrun (Linux Run) (http://www.ugcs.caltech.edu/
~steven/lxrun/)
A system call emulator that enables Linux
applications written for x86 hosts to run on UNIX
systems such as the SCO OpenServer
WINE (http://www.winehq.org/)
A library support system for virtualizing x86
processors to run Windows applications under
Linux, FreeBSD, and Solaris
Visual MainWin (http://www.mainsoft.com/)
A compiler support system to develop Windows
applications using Visual Studio to run on Solaris,
Linux, and AIX hosts
vCUDA (Example 3.2) (IEEE IPDPS 2009 [57])
Virtualization support for using general-purpose
GPUs to run data-intensive applications under a
special guest OS
138
CHAPTER 3 Virtual Machines and Virtualization of Clusters and Data Centers

The WABI offers middleware to convert Windows system calls to Solaris system calls. Lxrun is
really a system call emulator that enables Linux applications written for x86 hosts to run on UNIX
systems. Similarly, Wine offers library support for virtualizing x86 processors to run Windows appli-
cations on UNIX hosts. Visual MainWin offers a compiler support system to develop Windows appli-
cations using Visual Studio to run on some UNIX hosts. The vCUDA is explained in Example 3.2
with a graphical illustration in Figure 3.4.
Example 3.2 The vCUDA for Virtualization of General-Purpose GPUs
CUDA is a programming model and library for general-purpose GPUs. It leverages the high performance of
GPUs to run compute-intensive applications on host operating systems. However, it is difficult to run CUDA
applications on hardware-level VMs directly. vCUDA virtualizes the CUDA library and can be installed on
guest OSes. When CUDA applications run on a guest OS and issue a call to the CUDA API, vCUDA
intercepts the call and redirects it to the CUDA API running on the host OS. Figure 3.4 shows the basic
concept of the vCUDA architecture [57].
The vCUDA employs a client-server model to implement CUDA virtualization. It consists of three user
space components: the vCUDA library, a virtual GPU in the guest OS (which acts as a client), and the
vCUDA stub in the host OS (which acts as a server). The vCUDA library resides in the guest OS as a
substitute for the standard CUDA library. It is responsible for intercepting and redirecting API calls from
the client to the stub. Besides these tasks, vCUDA also creates vGPUs and manages them.
The functionality of a vGPU is threefold: It abstracts the GPU structure and gives applications a uni-
form view of the underlying hardware; when a CUDA application in the guest OS allocates a device’s mem-
ory the vGPU can return a local virtual address to the application and notify the remote stub to allocate the
real device memory, and the vGPU is responsible for storing the CUDA API flow. The vCUDA stub receives
Host OS
Guest OS
vCUDA stub
CUDA application
vCUDA library vGPU
CUDA library
Device driver
VMM
Device (GPU, Hard disk, Network card)
.........
FIGURE 3.4
Basic concept of the vCUDA architecture.
(Courtesy of Lin Shi, et al. © IEEE [57] )
3.1 Implementation Levels of Virtualization
139

and interprets remote requests and creates a corresponding execution context for the API calls from the
guest OS, then returns the results to the guest OS. The vCUDA stub also manages actual physical resource
allocation.
3.2 VIRTUALIZATION STRUCTURES/TOOLS AND MECHANISMS
In general, there are three typical classes of VM architecture. Figure 3.1 showed the architectures of
a machine before and after virtualization. Before virtualization, the operating system manages the
hardware. After virtualization, a virtualization layer is inserted between the hardware and the operat-
ing system. In such a case, the virtualization layer is responsible for converting portions of the real
hardware into virtual hardware. Therefore, different operating systems such as Linux and Windows
can run on the same physical machine, simultaneously. Depending on the position of the virtualiza-
tion layer, there are several classes of VM architectures, namely the hypervisor architecture, para-
virtualization, and host-based virtualization. The hypervisor is also known as the VMM (Virtual
Machine Monitor). They both perform the same virtualization operations.
3.2.1 Hypervisor and Xen Architecture
The hypervisor supports hardware-level virtualization (see Figure 3.1(b)) on bare metal devices like
CPU, memory, disk and network interfaces. The hypervisor software sits directly between the physi-
cal hardware and its OS. This virtualization layer is referred to as either the VMM or the hypervisor.
The hypervisor provides hypercalls for the guest OSes and applications. Depending on the functional-
ity, a hypervisor can assume a micro-kernel architecture like the Microsoft Hyper-V. Or it can
assume a monolithic hypervisor architecture like the VMware ESX for server virtualization.
A micro-kernel hypervisor includes only the basic and unchanging functions (such as physical
memory management and processor scheduling). The device drivers and other changeable components
are outside the hypervisor. A monolithic hypervisor implements all the aforementioned functions,
including those of the device drivers. Therefore, the size of the hypervisor code of a micro-kernel hyper-
visor is smaller than that of a monolithic hypervisor. Essentially, a hypervisor must be able to convert
physical devices into virtual resources dedicated for the deployed VM to use.
3.2.1.1 The Xen Architecture
Xen is an open source hypervisor program developed by Cambridge University. Xen is a micro-
kernel hypervisor, which separates the policy from the mechanism. The Xen hypervisor implements
all the mechanisms, leaving the policy to be handled by Domain 0, as shown in Figure 3.5. Xen
does not include any device drivers natively [7]. It just provides a mechanism by which a guest OS
can have direct access to the physical devices. As a result, the size of the Xen hypervisor is kept
rather small. Xen provides a virtual environment located between the hardware and the OS.
A number of vendors are in the process of developing commercial Xen hypervisors, among them
are Citrix XenServer [62] and Oracle VM [42].
The core components of a Xen system are the hypervisor, kernel, and applications. The organi-
zation of the three components is important. Like other virtualization systems, many guest OSes
can run on top of the hypervisor. However, not all guest OSes are created equal, and one in
140
CHAPTER 3 Virtual Machines and Virtualization of Clusters and Data Centers

particular controls the others. The guest OS, which has control ability, is called Domain 0, and the
others are called Domain U. Domain 0 is a privileged guest OS of Xen. It is first loaded when Xen
boots without any file system drivers being available. Domain 0 is designed to access hardware
directly and manage devices. Therefore, one of the responsibilities of Domain 0 is to allocate and
map hardware resources for the guest domains (the Domain U domains).
For example, Xen is based on Linux and its security level is C2. Its management VM is named
Domain 0, which has the privilege to manage other VMs implemented on the same host. If Domain
0 is compromised, the hacker can control the entire system. So, in the VM system, security policies
are needed to improve the security of Domain 0. Domain 0, behaving as a VMM, allows users to
create, copy, save, read, modify, share, migrate, and roll back VMs as easily as manipulating a file,
which flexibly provides tremendous benefits for users. Unfortunately, it also brings a series of
security problems during the software life cycle and data lifetime.
Traditionally, a machine’s lifetime can be envisioned as a straight line where the current state of
the machine is a point that progresses monotonically as the software executes. During this time, con-
figuration changes are made, software is installed, and patches are applied. In such an environment,
the VM state is akin to a tree: At any point, execution can go into N different branches where multiple
instances of a VM can exist at any point in this tree at any given time. VMs are allowed to roll back
to previous states in their execution (e.g., to fix configuration errors) or rerun from the same point
many times (e.g., as a means of distributing dynamic content or circulating a “live” system image).
3.2.2 Binary Translation with Full Virtualization
Depending on implementation technologies, hardware virtualization can be classified into two cate-
gories: full virtualization and host-based virtualization. Full virtualization does not need to modify
the host OS. It relies on binary translation to trap and to virtualize the execution of certain
sensitive, nonvirtualizable instructions. The guest OSes and their applications consist of noncritical
and critical instructions. In a host-based system, both a host OS and a guest OS are used. A virtuali-
zation software layer is built between the host OS and guest OS. These two classes of VM architec-
ture are introduced next.
Domain0
XenoLinux
XEN (Hypervisor)
Hardware devices
XenoWindows
Control, I/O (Domain 0)
Application
Application
Application
Application
Application
Application
Application
Application
Application
Application
Guest domain
Guest domain
FIGURE 3.5
The Xen architecture’s special domain 0 for control and I/O, and several guest domains for user applications.
(Courtesy of P. Barham, et al. [7] )
3.2 Virtualization Structures/Tools and Mechanisms
141

3.2.2.1 Full Virtualization
With full virtualization, noncritical instructions run on the hardware directly while critical
instructions are discovered and replaced with traps into the VMM to be emulated by software. Both
the hypervisor and VMM approaches are considered full virtualization. Why are only critical
instructions trapped into the VMM? This is because binary translation can incur a large performance
overhead. Noncritical instructions do not control hardware or threaten the security of the system, but
critical instructions do. Therefore, running noncritical instructions on hardware not only can
promote efficiency, but also can ensure system security.
3.2.2.2 Binary Translation of Guest OS Requests Using a VMM
This approach was implemented by VMware and many other software companies. As shown in
Figure 3.6, VMware puts the VMM at Ring 0 and the guest OS at Ring 1. The VMM scans the
instruction stream and identifies the privileged, control- and behavior-sensitive instructions. When
these instructions are identified, they are trapped into the VMM, which emulates the behavior of
these instructions. The method used in this emulation is called binary translation. Therefore, full vir-
tualization combines binary translation and direct execution. The guest OS is completely decoupled
from the underlying hardware. Consequently, the guest OS is unaware that it is being virtualized.
The performance of full virtualization may not be ideal, because it involves binary translation
which is rather time-consuming. In particular, the full virtualization of I/O-intensive applications is
a really a big challenge. Binary translation employs a code cache to store translated hot instructions
to improve performance, but it increases the cost of memory usage. At the time of this writing, the
performance of full virtualization on the x86 architecture is typically 80 percent to 97 percent that
of the host machine.
3.2.2.3 Host-Based Virtualization
An alternative VM architecture is to install a virtualization layer on top of the host OS. This host OS
is still responsible for managing the hardware. The guest OSes are installed and run on top of the
virtualization layer. Dedicated applications may run on the VMs. Certainly, some other applications
can also run with the host OS directly. This host-
based architecture has some distinct advantages,
as enumerated next. First, the user can install this
VM architecture without modifying the host OS.
The virtualizing software can rely on the host OS
to provide device drivers and other low-level ser-
vices. This will simplify the VM design and ease
its deployment.
Second, the host-based approach appeals to
many host machine configurations. Compared to
the hypervisor/VMM architecture, the perfor-
mance of the host-based architecture may also be
low. When an application requests hardware
access, it involves four layers of mapping which
downgrades performance significantly. When the
ISA of a guest OS is different from the ISA of
Ring 3
Ring 2
Ring 1
Binary
translation
of OS
requests
Direct
execution
of user
requests
Ring 0
User apps
Guest OS
VMM
Host computer
system hardware
FIGURE 3.6
Indirect execution of complex instructions via binary
translation of guest OS requests using the VMM plus
direct execution of simple instructions on the same host.
(Courtesy of VM Ware [71])
142
CHAPTER 3 Virtual Machines and Virtualization of Clusters and Data Centers

the underlying hardware, binary translation must be adopted. Although the host-based architecture has
flexibility, the performance is too low to be useful in practice.
3.2.3 Para-Virtualization with Compiler Support
Para-virtualization needs to modify the guest operating systems. A para-virtualized VM provides
special APIs requiring substantial OS modifications in user applications. Performance degradation is
a critical issue of a virtualized system. No one wants to use a VM if it is much slower than using a
physical machine. The virtualization layer can be inserted at different positions in a machine soft-
ware stack. However, para-virtualization attempts to reduce the virtualization overhead, and thus
improve performance by modifying only the guest OS kernel.
Figure 3.7 illustrates the concept of a para-virtualized VM architecture. The guest operating sys-
tems are para-virtualized. They are assisted by an intelligent compiler to replace the nonvirtualizable
OS instructions by hypercalls as illustrated in Figure 3.8. The traditional x86 processor offers four
instruction execution rings: Rings 0, 1, 2, and 3. The lower the ring number, the higher the privi-
lege of instruction being executed. The OS is responsible for managing the hardware and the privi-
leged instructions to execute at Ring 0, while user-level applications run at Ring 3. The best
example of para-virtualization is the KVM to be described below.
3.2.3.1 Para-Virtualization Architecture
When the x86 processor is virtualized, a virtualization layer is inserted between the hardware and
the OS. According to the x86 ring definition, the virtualization layer should also be installed at
Ring 0. Different instructions at Ring 0 may cause some problems. In Figure 3.8, we show that
para-virtualization replaces nonvirtualizable instructions with hypercalls that communicate directly
with the hypervisor or VMM. However, when the guest OS kernel is modified for virtualization, it
can no longer run on the hardware directly.
Application
Application
Para-virtualized
guest operating
system
Hypervisor/ VMM
Hardware
Para-virtualized
guest operating
system
FIGURE 3.7
Para-virtualized VM architecture, which involves
modifying the guest OS kernel to replace
nonvirtualizable instructions with hypercalls for the
hypervisor or the VMM to carry out the virtualization
process (See Figure 3.8 for more details.)
Ring 3
Ring 2
Ring 1
‘Hypercalls’ to the
virtualization
layer replace
nonvirtualizable
OS instructions
Direct
execution
of user
requests
Ring 0
User apps
Host computer
system hardware
Virtualization layer
Para-virtualized
guest OS
FIGURE 3.8
The use of a para-virtualized guest OS assisted by
an intelligent compiler to replace nonvirtualizable OS
instructions by hypercalls.
(Courtesy of VMWare [71])
3.2 Virtualization Structures/Tools and Mechanisms
143

Although para-virtualization reduces the overhead, it has incurred other problems. First, its
compatibility and portability may be in doubt, because it must support the unmodified OS as
well. Second, the cost of maintaining para-virtualized OSes is high, because they may require
deep OS kernel modifications. Finally, the performance advantage of para-virtualization varies
greatly due to workload variations. Compared with full virtualization, para-virtualization is
relatively easy and more practical. The main problem in full virtualization is its low performance
in binary translation. To speed up binary translation is difficult. Therefore, many virtualization
products employ the para-virtualization architecture. The popular Xen, KVM, and VMware ESX
are good examples.
3.2.3.2 KVM (Kernel-Based VM)
This is a Linux para-virtualization system—a part of the Linux version 2.6.20 kernel. Memory
management and scheduling activities are carried out by the existing Linux kernel. The KVM does
the rest, which makes it simpler than the hypervisor that controls the entire machine. KVM is a
hardware-assisted para-virtualization tool, which improves performance and supports unmodified
guest OSes such as Windows, Linux, Solaris, and other UNIX variants.
3.2.3.3 Para-Virtualization with Compiler Support
Unlike the full virtualization architecture which intercepts and emulates privileged and sensitive
instructions at runtime, para-virtualization handles these instructions at compile time. The guest OS
kernel is modified to replace the privileged and sensitive instructions with hypercalls to the hypervi-
sor or VMM. Xen assumes such a para-virtualization architecture.
The guest OS running in a guest domain may run at Ring 1 instead of at Ring 0. This implies
that the guest OS may not be able to execute some privileged and sensitive instructions. The
privileged instructions are implemented by hypercalls to the hypervisor. After replacing the instructions
with hypercalls, the modified guest OS emulates the behavior of the original guest OS. On an UNIX
system, a system call involves an interrupt or service routine. The hypercalls apply a dedicated service
routine in Xen.
Example 3.3 VMware ESX Server for Para-Virtualization
VMware pioneered the software market for virtualization. The company has developed virtualization tools
for desktop systems and servers as well as virtual infrastructure for large data centers. ESX is a VMM or
a hypervisor for bare-metal x86 symmetric multiprocessing (SMP) servers. It accesses hardware
resources such as I/O directly and has complete resource management control. An ESX-enabled server
consists of four components: a virtualization layer, a resource manager, hardware interface components,
and a service console, as shown in Figure 3.9. To improve performance, the ESX server employs
a para-virtualization architecture in which the VM kernel interacts directly with the hardware without
involving the host OS.
The VMM layer virtualizes the physical hardware resources such as CPU, memory, network and disk
controllers, and human interface devices. Every VM has its own set of virtual hardware resources. The
resource manager allocates CPU, memory disk, and network bandwidth and maps them to the virtual
hardware resource set of each VM created. Hardware interface components are the device drivers and the
144
CHAPTER 3 Virtual Machines and Virtualization of Clusters and Data Centers

VMware ESX Server File System. The service console is responsible for booting the system, initiating the
execution of the VMM and resource manager, and relinquishing control to those layers. It also facilitates
the process for system administrators.
3.3 VIRTUALIZATION OF CPU, MEMORY, AND I/O DEVICES
To support virtualization, processors such as the x86 employ a special running mode and instructions,
known as hardware-assisted virtualization. In this way, the VMM and guest OS run in different
modes and all sensitive instructions of the guest OS and its applications are trapped in the VMM. To
save processor states, mode switching is completed by hardware. For the x86 architecture, Intel and
AMD have proprietary technologies for hardware-assisted virtualization.
3.3.1 Hardware Support for Virtualization
Modern operating systems and processors permit multiple processes to run simultaneously. If there
is no protection mechanism in a processor, all instructions from different processes will access the
hardware directly and cause a system crash. Therefore, all processors have at least two modes, user
mode and supervisor mode, to ensure controlled access of critical hardware. Instructions running in
supervisor mode are called privileged instructions. Other instructions are unprivileged instructions.
In a virtualized environment, it is more difficult to make OSes and applications run correctly
because there are more layers in the machine stack. Example 3.4 discusses Intel’s hardware support
approach.
Guest
OS
VMM
VMkernel
x86 SMP
hardware
Scheduler
CPU
Memory
disk
NIC
Memory
mgmt
SCSI
driver
Ethernet
driver
VMM
VMM
VMM
Console
OS
Guest
OS
Guest
OS
Guest
OS
FIGURE 3.9
The VMware ESX server architecture using para-virtualization.
(Courtesy of VMware [71] )
3.3 Virtualization of CPU, Memory, and I/O Devices
145

At the time of this writing, many hardware virtualization products were available. The VMware
Workstation is a VM software suite for x86 and x86-64 computers. This software suite allows users
to set up multiple x86 and x86-64 virtual computers and to use one or more of these VMs simulta-
neously with the host operating system. The VMware Workstation assumes the host-based virtuali-
zation. Xen is a hypervisor for use in IA-32, x86-64, Itanium, and PowerPC 970 hosts. Actually,
Xen modifies Linux as the lowest and most privileged layer, or a hypervisor.
One or more guest OS can run on top of the hypervisor. KVM (Kernel-based Virtual Machine)
is a Linux kernel virtualization infrastructure. KVM can support hardware-assisted virtualization and
paravirtualization by using the Intel VT-x or AMD-v and VirtIO framework, respectively. The
VirtIO framework includes a paravirtual Ethernet card, a disk I/O controller, a balloon device for
adjusting guest memory usage, and a VGA graphics interface using VMware drivers.
Example 3.4 Hardware Support for Virtualization in the Intel x86 Processor
Since software-based virtualization techniques are complicated and incur performance overhead,
Intel provides a hardware-assist technique to make virtualization easy and improve performance.
Figure 3.10 provides an overview of Intel’s full virtualization techniques. For processor virtualization,
Intel offers the VT-x or VT-i technique. VT-x adds a privileged mode (VMX Root Mode) and some
instructions to processors. This enhancement traps all sensitive instructions in the VMM automatically.
For memory virtualization, Intel offers the EPT, which translates the virtual address to the machine’s
physical addresses to improve performance. For I/O virtualization, Intel implements VT-d and VT-c to
support this.
VM0
Apps
OS
OS
OS
Apps
Apps
...
Processor
VT-x or VT-i
VT-i
VT-x
EPT
VT-d
VT-c
EPT
DMA and interrupt remap
Sharable
Network
Storage
Memory
I/O device
OS
Apps
VM1
VM2
VMn
FIGURE 3.10
Intel hardware support for virtualization of processor, memory, and I/O devices.
(Modified from [68], Courtesy of Lizhong Chen, USC)
146
CHAPTER 3 Virtual Machines and Virtualization of Clusters and Data Centers

3.3.2 CPU Virtualization
A VM is a duplicate of an existing computer system in which a majority of the VM instructions are
executed on the host processor in native mode. Thus, unprivileged instructions of VMs run directly on the
host machine for higher efficiency. Other critical instructions should be handled carefully for correctness
and stability. The critical instructions are divided into three categories: privileged instructions, control-
sensitive instructions, and behavior-sensitive instructions. Privileged instructions execute in a privileged
mode and will be trapped if executed outside this mode. Control-sensitive instructions attempt to change
the configuration of resources used. Behavior-sensitive instructions have different behaviors depending
on the configuration of resources, including the load and store operations over the virtual memory.
A CPU architecture is virtualizable if it supports the ability to run the VM’s privileged and
unprivileged instructions in the CPU’s user mode while the VMM runs in supervisor mode. When
the privileged instructions including control- and behavior-sensitive instructions of a VM are exe-
cuted, they are trapped in the VMM. In this case, the VMM acts as a unified mediator for hardware
access from different VMs to guarantee the correctness and stability of the whole system. However,
not all CPU architectures are virtualizable. RISC CPU architectures can be naturally virtualized
because all control- and behavior-sensitive instructions are privileged instructions. On the contrary,
x86 CPU architectures are not primarily designed to support virtualization. This is because about 10
sensitive instructions, such as SGDT and SMSW, are not privileged instructions. When these instruc-
tions execute in virtualization, they cannot be trapped in the VMM.
On a native UNIX-like system, a system call triggers the 80h interrupt and passes control to the
OS kernel. The interrupt handler in the kernel is then invoked to process the system call. On a para-
virtualization system such as Xen, a system call in the guest OS first triggers the 80h interrupt nor-
mally. Almost at the same time, the 82h interrupt in the hypervisor is triggered. Incidentally,
control is passed on to the hypervisor as well. When the hypervisor completes its task for the guest
OS system call, it passes control back to the guest OS kernel. Certainly, the guest OS kernel may
also invoke the hypercall while it’s running. Although paravirtualization of a CPU lets unmodified
applications run in the VM, it causes a small performance penalty.
3.3.2.1 Hardware-Assisted CPU Virtualization
This technique attempts to simplify virtualization because full or paravirtualization is complicated.
Intel and AMD add an additional mode called privilege mode level (some people call it Ring-1) to
x86 processors. Therefore, operating systems can still run at Ring 0 and the hypervisor can run at
Ring -1. All the privileged and sensitive instructions are trapped in the hypervisor automatically.
This technique removes the difficulty of implementing binary translation of full virtualization. It
also lets the operating system run in VMs without modification.
Example 3.5 Intel Hardware-Assisted CPU Virtualization
Although x86 processors are not virtualizable primarily, great effort is taken to virtualize them. They are used
widely in comparing RISC processors that the bulk of x86-based legacy systems cannot discard easily. Virtuali-
zation of x86 processors is detailed in the following sections. Intel’s VT-x technology is an example of
hardware-assisted virtualization, as shown in Figure 3.11. Intel calls the privilege level of x86 processors the
VMX Root Mode. In order to control the start and stop of a VM and allocate a memory page to maintain the
3.3 Virtualization of CPU, Memory, and I/O Devices
147

CPU state for VMs, a set of additional instructions is added. At the time of this writing, Xen, VMware, and the
Microsoft Virtual PC all implement their hypervisors by using the VT-x technology.
Generally, hardware-assisted virtualization should have high efficiency. However, since the transition from
the hypervisor to the guest OS incurs high overhead switches between processor modes, it sometimes
cannot outperform binary translation. Hence, virtualization systems such as VMware now use a hybrid
approach, in which a few tasks are offloaded to the hardware but the rest is still done in software. In addition,
para-virtualization and hardware-assisted virtualization can be combined to improve the performance further.
3.3.3 Memory Virtualization
Virtual memory virtualization is similar to the virtual memory support provided by modern operat-
ing systems. In a traditional execution environment, the operating system maintains mappings of
virtual memory to machine memory using page tables, which is a one-stage mapping from virtual
memory to machine memory. All modern x86 CPUs include a memory management unit (MMU)
and a translation lookaside buffer (TLB) to optimize virtual memory performance. However, in a
virtual execution environment, virtual memory virtualization involves sharing the physical system
memory in RAM and dynamically allocating it to the physical memory of the VMs.
That means a two-stage mapping process should be maintained by the guest OS and the VMM,
respectively: virtual memory to physical memory and physical memory to machine memory.
Furthermore, MMU virtualization should be supported, which is transparent to the guest OS.
The guest OS continues to control the mapping of virtual addresses to the physical memory
addresses of VMs. But the guest OS cannot directly access the actual machine memory. The VMM
is responsible for mapping the guest physical memory to the actual machine memory. Figure 3.12
shows the two-level memory mapping procedure.
VT-x
CPU0
VM0
Ring 3
Ring 0
VMX
root
mode
Apps
WinXP
VM0
Apps
WinXP
VMM
VM
entry
VM control structure
VM
exit
VMCS
configuration
Memory and I/O
virtualization
VT-x
CPU0
Processors with
VT-x (or VT-i)
FIGURE 3.11
Intel hardware-assisted CPU virtualization.
(Modified from [68], Courtesy of Lizhong Chen, USC)
148
CHAPTER 3 Virtual Machines and Virtualization of Clusters and Data Centers

Since each page table of the guest OSes has a separate page table in the VMM corresponding to
it, the VMM page table is called the shadow page table. Nested page tables add another layer of
indirection to virtual memory. The MMU already handles virtual-to-physical translations as defined
by the OS. Then the physical memory addresses are translated to machine addresses using another
set of page tables defined by the hypervisor. Since modern operating systems maintain a set of
page tables for every process, the shadow page tables will get flooded. Consequently, the perfor-
mance overhead and cost of memory will be very high.
VMware uses shadow page tables to perform virtual-memory-to-machine-memory address trans-
lation. Processors use TLB hardware to map the virtual memory directly to the machine memory to
avoid the two levels of translation on every access. When the guest OS changes the virtual memory
to a physical memory mapping, the VMM updates the shadow page tables to enable a direct
lookup. The AMD Barcelona processor has featured hardware-assisted memory virtualization since
2007. It provides hardware assistance to the two-stage address translation in a virtual execution
environment by using a technology called nested paging.
Example 3.6 Extended Page Table by Intel for Memory Virtualization
Since the efficiency of the software shadow page table technique was too low, Intel developed a hardware-
based EPT technique to improve it, as illustrated in Figure 3.13. In addition, Intel offers a Virtual Processor
ID (VPID) to improve use of the TLB. Therefore, the performance of memory virtualization is greatly
improved. In Figure 3.13, the page tables of the guest OS and EPT are all four-level.
When a virtual address needs to be translated, the CPU will first look for the L4 page table pointed to by
Guest CR3. Since the address in Guest CR3 is a physical address in the guest OS, the CPU needs to convert
the Guest CR3 GPA to the host physical address (HPA) using EPT. In this procedure, the CPU will check the
EPT TLB to see if the translation is there. If there is no required translation in the EPT TLB, the CPU will look
for it in the EPT. If the CPU cannot find the translation in the EPT, an EPT violation exception will be raised.
When the GPA of the L4 page table is obtained, the CPU will calculate the GPA of the L3 page table
by using the GVA and the content of the L4 page table. If the entry corresponding to the GVA in the L4
VM1
Process1
Process2
VM2
Process1
Process2
Virtual VA
memory
Physical PA
memory
Machine MA
memory
FIGURE 3.12
Two-level memory mapping procedure.
(Courtesy of R. Rblig, et al. [68])
3.3 Virtualization of CPU, Memory, and I/O Devices
149

page table is a page fault, the CPU will generate a page fault interrupt and will let the guest OS kernel
handle the interrupt. When the PGA of the L3 page table is obtained, the CPU will look for the EPT to get
the HPA of the L3 page table, as described earlier. To get the HPA corresponding to a GVA, the CPU
needs to look for the EPT five times, and each time, the memory needs to be accessed four times. There-
fore, there are 20 memory accesses in the worst case, which is still very slow. To overcome this short-
coming, Intel increased the size of the EPT TLB to decrease the number of memory accesses.
3.3.4 I/O Virtualization
I/O virtualization involves managing the routing of I/O requests between virtual devices and
the shared physical hardware. At the time of this writing, there are three ways to implement I/O vir-
tualization: full device emulation, para-virtualization, and direct I/O. Full device emulation is the first
approach for I/O virtualization. Generally, this approach emulates well-known, real-world devices.
Process in guest OS
GVA
CR3
GPA
EPT MMU
HPA
GPA
EPT
pointer
Hardware
EPT TLB
GVA: virtual memory
address of a process in
guest OS
GPA: physical memory
address in guest OS
HPA: physical memory
address of the host
machine
L4
L3
L1
L2
Guest OS
kernel
Virtual
machine
VMM
FIGURE 3.13
Memory virtualization using EPT by Intel (the EPT is also known as the shadow page table [68]).
150
CHAPTER 3 Virtual Machines and Virtualization of Clusters and Data Centers

All the functions of a device or bus infrastructure, such as device enumeration, identification,
interrupts, and DMA, are replicated in software. This software is located in the VMM and acts as a
virtual device. The I/O access requests of the guest OS are trapped in the VMM which interacts with
the I/O devices. The full device emulation approach is shown in Figure 3.14.
A single hardware device can be shared by multiple VMs that run concurrently. However, software
emulation runs much slower than the hardware it emulates [10,15]. The para-virtualization method of
I/O virtualization is typically used in Xen. It is also known as the split driver model consisting of a
frontend driver and a backend driver. The frontend driver is running in Domain U and the backend dri-
ver is running in Domain 0. They interact with each other via a block of shared memory. The frontend
driver manages the I/O requests of the guest OSes and the backend driver is responsible for managing
the real I/O devices and multiplexing the I/O data of different VMs. Although para-I/O-virtualization
achieves better device performance than full device emulation, it comes with a higher CPU overhead.
Direct I/O virtualization lets the VM access devices directly. It can achieve close-to-native per-
formance without high CPU costs. However, current direct I/O virtualization implementations focus
on networking for mainframes. There are a lot of challenges for commodity hardware devices. For
example, when a physical device is reclaimed (required by workload migration) for later reassign-
ment, it may have been set to an arbitrary state (e.g., DMA to some arbitrary memory locations)
that can function incorrectly or even crash the whole system. Since software-based I/O virtualization
requires a very high overhead of device emulation, hardware-assisted I/O virtualization is critical.
Intel VT-d supports the remapping of I/O DMA transfers and device-generated interrupts. The archi-
tecture of VT-d provides the flexibility to support multiple usage models that may run unmodified,
special-purpose, or “virtualization-aware” guest OSes.
Another way to help I/O virtualization is via self-virtualized I/O (SV-IO) [47]. The key idea of
SV-IO is to harness the rich resources of a multicore processor. All tasks associated with virtualizing an
I/O device are encapsulated in SV-IO. It provides virtual devices and an associated access API to VMs
and a management API to the VMM. SV-IO defines one virtual interface (VIF) for every kind of virtua-
lized I/O device, such as virtual network interfaces, virtual block devices (disk), virtual camera devices,
• Guest device driver
Guest OS
Device driver
Device
emulation
I/O Stack
Device driver
• Virtual device
• Real device
   – may be different from virtual device
Virtualization layer
• Virtualization layer
   – emulates the virtual device
   – remaps guest and real I/O addresses
   – multiplexes and drives the physical device
   – I/O features. e.g., COW disks
FIGURE 3.14
Device emulation for I/O virtualization implemented inside the middle layer that maps real I/O devices into the
virtual devices for the guest device driver to use.
(Courtesy of V. Chadha, et al. [10] and Y. Dong, et al. [15])
3.3 Virtualization of CPU, Memory, and I/O Devices
151

and others. The guest OS interacts with the VIFs via VIF device drivers. Each VIF consists of two mes-
sage queues. One is for outgoing messages to the devices and the other is for incoming messages from
the devices. In addition, each VIF has a unique ID for identifying it in SV-IO.
Example 3.7 VMware Workstation for I/O Virtualization
The VMware Workstation runs as an application. It leverages the I/O device support in guest OSes, host OSes,
and VMM to implement I/O virtualization. The application portion (VMApp) uses a driver loaded into the host
operating system (VMDriver) to establish the privileged VMM, which runs directly on the hardware. A given
physical processor is executed in either the host world or the VMM world, with the VMDriver facilitating the
transfer of control between the two worlds. The VMware Workstation employs full device emulation to
implement I/O virtualization. Figure 3.15 shows the functional blocks used in sending and receiving packets
via the emulated virtual NIC.
Network packet send
Network packet receive
Host Ethernet driver
VMApp
VMNet driver
memcpy to VM memory
ask VMM to rasie IRQ
return from select()
raise IRQ
VMM
Guest OS
VMM
IN/OUT to I/O port
Context switch
Return from IOCTL
VMApp
Packet receive completion
VMDriver
Bridge code
Device interrupt
Ethernet H/W
Guest OS
OUT to I/O port
Context switch
Return to VMApp
Syscall
Bridge code
OUT to I/O port
VMM
VMDriver
VMApp
VMNet driver
Host Ethernet driver
Ethernet H/W
packet launch
FIGURE 3.15
Functional blocks involved in sending and receiving network packets.
(Courtesy of VMWare [71])
152
CHAPTER 3 Virtual Machines and Virtualization of Clusters and Data Centers

The virtual NIC models an AMD Lance Am79C970A controller. The device driver for a Lance controller
in the guest OS initiates packet transmissions by reading and writing a sequence of virtual I/O ports; each
read or write switches back to the VMApp to emulate the Lance port accesses. When the last OUT instruc-
tion of the sequence is encountered, the Lance emulator calls a normal write() to the VMNet driver. The
VMNet driver then passes the packet onto the network via a host NIC and then the VMApp switches back
to the VMM. The switch raises a virtual interrupt to notify the guest device driver that the packet was sent.
Packet receives occur in reverse.
3.3.5 Virtualization in Multi-Core Processors
Virtualizing a multi-core processor is relatively more complicated than virtualizing a uni-core processor.
Though multicore processors are claimed to have higher performance by integrating multiple processor
cores in a single chip, muti-core virtualiuzation has raised some new challenges to computer architects,
compiler constructors, system designers, and application programmers. There are mainly two difficul-
ties: Application programs must be parallelized to use all cores fully, and software must explicitly
assign tasks to the cores, which is a very complex problem.
Concerning the first challenge, new programming models, languages, and libraries are needed to
make parallel programming easier. The second challenge has spawned research involving scheduling
algorithms and resource management policies. Yet these efforts cannot balance well among perfor-
mance, complexity, and other issues. What is worse, as technology scales, a new challenge called
dynamic heterogeneity is emerging to mix the fat CPU core and thin GPU cores on the same chip,
which further complicates the multi-core or many-core resource management. The dynamic hetero-
geneity of hardware infrastructure mainly comes from less reliable transistors and increased complexity
in using the transistors [33,66].
3.3.5.1 Physical versus Virtual Processor Cores
Wells, et al. [74] proposed a multicore virtualization method to allow hardware designers to get an
abstraction of the low-level details of the processor cores. This technique alleviates the burden and
inefficiency of managing hardware resources by software. It is located under the ISA and remains
unmodified by the operating system or VMM (hypervisor). Figure 3.16 illustrates the technique of a
software-visible VCPU moving from one core to another and temporarily suspending execution of a
VCPU when there are no appropriate cores on which it can run.
3.3.5.2 Virtual Hierarchy
The emerging many-core chip multiprocessors (CMPs) provides a new computing landscape.
Instead of supporting time-sharing jobs on one or a few cores, we can use the abundant cores in a
space-sharing, where single-threaded or multithreaded jobs are simultaneously assigned to separate
groups of cores for long time intervals. This idea was originally suggested by Marty and Hill [39].
To optimize for space-shared workloads, they propose using virtual hierarchies to overlay a coher-
ence and caching hierarchy onto a physical processor. Unlike a fixed physical hierarchy, a virtual
hierarchy can adapt to fit how the work is space shared for improved performance and performance
isolation.
3.3 Virtualization of CPU, Memory, and I/O Devices
153

Today’s many-core CMPs use a physical hierarchy of two or more cache levels that stati-
cally determine the cache allocation and mapping. A virtual hierarchy is a cache hierarchy
that can adapt to fit the workload or mix of workloads [39]. The hierarchy’s first level locates
data blocks close to the cores needing them for faster access, establishes a shared-cache domain,
and establishes a point of coherence for faster communication. When a miss leaves a tile, it
first attempts to locate the block (or sharers) within the first level. The first level can also pro-
vide isolation between independent workloads. A miss at the L1 cache can invoke the L2
access.
The idea is illustrated in Figure 3.17(a). Space sharing is applied to assign three workloads to
three clusters of virtual cores: namely VM0 and VM3 for database workload, VM1 and VM2 for
web server workload, and VM4–VM7 for middleware workload. The basic assumption is that each
workload runs in its own VM. However, space sharing applies equally within a single operating
system. Statically distributing the directory among tiles can do much better, provided operating sys-
tems or hypervisors carefully map virtual pages to physical frames. Marty and Hill suggested a
two-level virtual coherence and caching hierarchy that harmonizes with the assignment of tiles to
the virtual clusters of VMs.
Figure 3.17(b) illustrates a logical view of such a virtual cluster hierarchy in two levels. Each
VM operates in a isolated fashion at the first level. This will minimize both miss access time and
performance interference with other workloads or VMs. Moreover, the shared resources of cache
capacity, inter-connect links, and miss handling are mostly isolated between VMs. The second level
maintains a globally shared memory. This facilitates dynamically repartitioning resources without
costly cache flushes. Furthermore, maintaining globally shared memory minimizes changes to
existing system software and allows virtualization features such as content-based page sharing.
A virtual hierarchy adapts to space-shared workloads like multiprogramming and server consolida-
tion. Figure 3.17 shows a case study focused on consolidated server workloads in a tiled architecture.
This many-core mapping scheme can also optimize for space-shared multiprogrammed workloads in
a single-OS environment.
C0
V0
System
software
Chip
SW Threads/Guest VMs
Virtual
procs.
ISA
Physical
cores
Paused
V1
V2
V3
C1
C2
FIGURE 3.16
Multicore virtualization method that exposes four VCPUs to the software, when only three cores are actually
present.
(Courtesy of Wells, et al. [74] )
154
CHAPTER 3 Virtual Machines and Virtualization of Clusters and Data Centers

3.4 VIRTUAL CLUSTERS AND RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
A physical cluster is a collection of servers (physical machines) interconnected by a physical network
such as a LAN. In Chapter 2, we studied various clustering techniques on physical machines. Here,
we introduce virtual clusters and study its properties as well as explore their potential applications.
In this section, we will study three critical design issues of virtual clusters: live migration of VMs,
memory and file migrations, and dynamic deployment of virtual clusters.
VM1: Web server
VM2: Web server
VM0: Database
VM4: Middleware
VM5: Middleware
VM6: Middleware
VM7: Middleware
VM3: Database
(a) Mapping of VMs into adjacent cores
L2 cache
Processor
L1
1&D
(b) Multiple virtual clusters assigned to various workloads
Level 1
Level 2
FIGURE 3.17
CMP server consolidation by space-sharing of VMs into many cores forming multiple virtual clusters to
execute various workloads.
(Courtesy of Marty and Hill [39])
3.4 Virtual Clusters and Resource Management
155

When a traditional VM is initialized, the administrator needs to manually write configuration
information or specify the configuration sources. When more VMs join a network, an inefficient
configuration always causes problems with overloading or underutilization. Amazon’s Elastic
Compute Cloud (EC2) is a good example of a web service that provides elastic computing power in
a cloud. EC2 permits customers to create VMs and to manage user accounts over the time of their
use. Most virtualization platforms, including XenServer and VMware ESX Server, support a brid-
ging mode which allows all domains to appear on the network as individual hosts. By using this
mode, VMs can communicate with one another freely through the virtual network interface card
and configure the network automatically.
3.4.1 Physical versus Virtual Clusters
Virtual clusters are built with VMs installed at distributed servers from one or more physical clus-
ters. The VMs in a virtual cluster are interconnected logically by a virtual network across several
physical networks. Figure 3.18 illustrates the concepts of virtual clusters and physical clusters. Each
virtual cluster is formed with physical machines or a VM hosted by multiple physical clusters. The
virtual cluster boundaries are shown as distinct boundaries.
The provisioning of VMs to a virtual cluster is done dynamically to have the following interest-
ing properties:
•
The virtual cluster nodes can be either physical or virtual machines. Multiple VMs running with
different OSes can be deployed on the same physical node.
•
A VM runs with a guest OS, which is often different from the host OS, that manages the
resources in the physical machine, where the VM is implemented.
•
The purpose of using VMs is to consolidate multiple functionalities on the same server. This
will greatly enhance server utilization and application flexibility.
Physical
cluster 1
Physical
cluster 2
Physical
cluster 3
Virtual
machines
Virtual
Cluster 1
Virtual
cluster 2
Virtual
cluster 4
Virtual
cluster 3
Virtual
cluster 1
FIGURE 3.18
A cloud platform with four virtual clusters over three physical clusters shaded differently.
(Courtesy of Fan Zhang, Tsinghua University )
156
CHAPTER 3 Virtual Machines and Virtualization of Clusters and Data Centers

•
VMs can be colonized (replicated) in multiple servers for the purpose of promoting distributed
parallelism, fault tolerance, and disaster recovery.
•
The size (number of nodes) of a virtual cluster can grow or shrink dynamically, similar to the
way an overlay network varies in size in a peer-to-peer (P2P) network.
•
The failure of any physical nodes may disable some VMs installed on the failing nodes. But the
failure of VMs will not pull down the host system.
Since system virtualization has been widely used, it is necessary to effectively manage VMs
running on a mass of physical computing nodes (also called virtual clusters) and consequently build
a high-performance virtualized computing environment. This involves virtual cluster deployment,
monitoring and management over large-scale clusters, as well as resource scheduling, load
balancing, server consolidation, fault tolerance, and other techniques. The different node colors in
Figure 3.18 refer to different virtual clusters. In a virtual cluster system, it is quite important to
store the large number of VM images efficiently.
Figure 3.19 shows the concept of a virtual cluster based on application partitioning or customi-
zation. The different colors in the figure represent the nodes in different virtual clusters. As a large
number of VM images might be present, the most important thing is to determine how to store
those images in the system efficiently. There are common installations for most users or applica-
tions, such as operating systems or user-level programming libraries. These software packages can
be preinstalled as templates (called template VMs). With these templates, users can build their own
software stacks. New OS instances can be copied from the template VM. User-specific components
such as programming libraries and applications can be installed to those instances.
Three physical clusters are shown on the left side of Figure 3.18. Four virtual clusters are created
on the right, over the physical clusters. The physical machines are also called host systems. In
contrast, the VMs are guest systems. The host and guest systems may run with different operating
System area network
Virtual cluster
nodes for
application A 
Virtual cluster
nodes for
application B
Virtual cluster
nodes for
application C
Virtual cluster
nodes for
application D
VMM
VMM
VMM
VMM
VMM
VM1
VM2
VM3
VM1
VM2
VM3
VM1
VM2
VM3
VM4
VM1
VM2
VM3
VM4
VM1
VM2
VM3
VM4
FIGURE 3.19
The concept of a virtual cluster based on application partitioning.
(Courtesy of Kang Chen, Tsinghua University 2008)
3.4 Virtual Clusters and Resource Management
157

systems. Each VM can be installed on a remote server or replicated on multiple servers belonging to
the same or different physical clusters. The boundary of a virtual cluster can change as VM nodes are
added, removed, or migrated dynamically over time.
3.4.1.1 Fast Deployment and Effective Scheduling
The system should have the capability of fast deployment. Here, deployment means two things:
to construct and distribute software stacks (OS, libraries, applications) to a physical node inside clus-
ters as fast as possible, and to quickly switch runtime environments from one user’s virtual cluster to
another user’s virtual cluster. If one user finishes using his system, the corresponding virtual cluster
should shut down or suspend quickly to save the resources to run other VMs for other users.
The concept of “green computing” has attracted much attention recently. However, previous
approaches have focused on saving the energy cost of components in a single workstation without a
global vision. Consequently, they do not necessarily reduce the power consumption of the whole clus-
ter. Other cluster-wide energy-efficient techniques can only be applied to homogeneous workstations
and specific applications. The live migration of VMs allows workloads of one node to transfer to
another node. However, it does not guarantee that VMs can randomly migrate among themselves. In
fact, the potential overhead caused by live migrations of VMs cannot be ignored.
The overhead may have serious negative effects on cluster utilization, throughput, and QoS
issues. Therefore, the challenge is to determine how to design migration strategies to implement
green computing without influencing the performance of clusters. Another advantage of virtualiza-
tion is load balancing of applications in a virtual cluster. Load balancing can be achieved using the
load index and frequency of user logins. The automatic scale-up and scale-down mechanism of a
virtual cluster can be implemented based on this model. Consequently, we can increase the resource
utilization of nodes and shorten the response time of systems. Mapping VMs onto the most appro-
priate physical node should promote performance. Dynamically adjusting loads among nodes by
live migration of VMs is desired, when the loads on cluster nodes become quite unbalanced.
3.4.1.2 High-Performance Virtual Storage
The template VM can be distributed to several physical hosts in the cluster to customize the VMs. In
addition, existing software packages reduce the time for customization as well as switching virtual
environments. It is important to efficiently manage the disk spaces occupied by template software
packages. Some storage architecture design can be applied to reduce duplicated blocks in a distributed
file system of virtual clusters. Hash values are used to compare the contents of data blocks. Users
have their own profiles which store the identification of the data blocks for corresponding VMs in a
user-specific virtual cluster. New blocks are created when users modify the corresponding data.
Newly created blocks are identified in the users’ profiles.
Basically, there are four steps to deploy a group of VMs onto a target cluster: preparing the disk
image, configuring the VMs, choosing the destination nodes, and executing the VM deployment command
on every host. Many systems use templates to simplify the disk image preparation process. A template is
a disk image that includes a preinstalled operating system with or without certain application software.
Users choose a proper template according to their requirements and make a duplicate of it as their own
disk image. Templates could implement the COW (Copy on Write) format. A new COW backup file is
very small and easy to create and transfer. Therefore, it definitely reduces disk space consumption. In
addition, VM deployment time is much shorter than that of copying the whole raw image file.
158
CHAPTER 3 Virtual Machines and Virtualization of Clusters and Data Centers

Every VM is configured with a name, disk image, network setting, and allocated CPU and
memory. One needs to record each VM configuration into a file. However, this method is inefficient
when managing a large group of VMs. VMs with the same configurations could use preedited profiles
to simplify the process. In this scenario, the system configures the VMs according to the chosen pro-
file. Most configuration items use the same settings, while some of them, such as UUID, VM name,
and IP address, are assigned with automatically calculated values. Normally, users do not care which
host is running their VM. A strategy to choose the proper destination host for any VM is needed. The
deployment principle is to fulfill the VM requirement and to balance workloads among the whole
host network.
3.4.2 Live VM Migration Steps and Performance Effects
In a cluster built with mixed nodes of host and guest systems, the normal method of operation is to
run everything on the physical machine. When a VM fails, its role could be replaced by another VM
on a different node, as long as they both run with the same guest OS. In other words, a physical node
can fail over to a VM on another host. This is different from physical-to-physical failover in a tradi-
tional physical cluster. The advantage is enhanced failover flexibility. The potential drawback is that
a VM must stop playing its role if its residing host node fails. However, this problem can be mitigated
with VM life migration. Figure 3.20 shows the process of life migration of a VM from host A to host
B. The migration copies the VM state file from the storage area to the host machine.
There are four ways to manage a virtual cluster. First, you can use a guest-based manager, by which
the cluster manager resides on a guest system. In this case, multiple VMs form a virtual cluster. For
example, openMosix is an open source Linux cluster running different guest systems on top of the Xen
hypervisor. Another example is Sun’s cluster Oasis, an experimental Solaris cluster of VMs supported
by a VMware VMM. Second, you can build a cluster manager on the host systems. The host-based
manager supervises the guest systems and can restart the guest system on another physical machine.
A good example is the VMware HA system that can restart a guest system after failure.
These two cluster management systems are either guest-only or host-only, but they do not mix. A
third way to manage a virtual cluster is to use an independent cluster manager on both the host and
guest systems. This will make infrastructure management more complex, however. Finally, you can
use an integrated cluster on the guest and host systems. This means the manager must be designed to
distinguish between virtualized resources and physical resources. Various cluster management
schemes can be greatly enhanced when VM life migration is enabled with minimal overhead.
VMs can be live-migrated from one physical machine to another; in case of failure, one VM can be
replaced by another VM. Virtual clusters can be applied in computational grids, cloud platforms, and
high-performance computing (HPC) systems. The major attraction of this scenario is that virtual cluster-
ing provides dynamic resources that can be quickly put together upon user demand or after a node
failure. In particular, virtual clustering plays a key role in cloud computing. When a VM runs a live ser-
vice, it is necessary to make a trade-off to ensure that the migration occurs in a manner that minimizes
all three metrics. The motivation is to design a live VM migration scheme with negligible downtime,
the lowest network bandwidth consumption possible, and a reasonable total migration time.
Furthermore, we should ensure that the migration will not disrupt other active services residing
in the same host through resource contention (e.g., CPU, network bandwidth). A VM can be in one
of the following four states. An inactive state is defined by the virtualization platform, under which
3.4 Virtual Clusters and Resource Management
159

the VM is not enabled. An active state refers to a VM that has been instantiated at the virtualization
platform to perform a real task. A paused state corresponds to a VM that has been instantiated but
disabled to process a task or paused in a waiting state. A VM enters the suspended state if its
machine file and virtual resources are stored back to the disk. As shown in Figure 3.20, live migra-
tion of a VM consists of the following six steps:
Steps 0 and 1: Start migration. This step makes preparations for the migration, including
determining the migrating VM and the destination host. Although users could manually make a
VM migrate to an appointed host, in most circumstances, the migration is automatically started
by strategies such as load balancing and server consolidation.
Steps 2: Transfer memory. Since the whole execution state of the VM is stored in memory,
sending the VM’s memory to the destination node ensures continuity of the service provided by
the VM. All of the memory data is transferred in the first round, and then the migration controller
recopies the memory data which is changed in the last round. These steps keep iterating until the
dirty portion of the memory is small enough to handle the final copy. Although precopying
memory is performed iteratively, the execution of programs is not obviously interrupted.
Stage 0: Pre-Migration
  Active VM on Host A
  Alternate physical host may be preselected for migration
  Block devices mirrored and free resources maintained
Stage 1: Reservation
  Initialize a container on the target host
Stage 2: Iterative pre-copy
  Enable shadow paging
  Copy dirty pages in successive rounds.
Stage 3: Stop and copy
  Suspend VM on host A
  Generate ARP to redirect traffic to Host B
  Synchronize all remaining VM state to Host B
Stage 4: Commitment
  VM state on Host A is released
Stage 5: Activation
  VM starts on Host B
  Connects to local devices
  Resumes normal operation
VM running normally on
Host A
Downtime
(VM out of service)
Overhead due to copying
VM running normally on
Host B
FIGURE 3.20
Live migration process of a VM from one host to another.
(Courtesy of C. Clark, et al. [14] )
160
CHAPTER 3 Virtual Machines and Virtualization of Clusters and Data Centers

Step 3: Suspend the VM and copy the last portion of the data. The migrating VM’s
execution is suspended when the last round’s memory data is transferred. Other nonmemory data
such as CPU and network states should be sent as well. During this step, the VM is stopped and
its applications will no longer run. This “service unavailable” time is called the “downtime” of
migration, which should be as short as possible so that it can be negligible to users.
Steps 4 and 5: Commit and activate the new host. After all the needed data is copied, on the
destination host, the VM reloads the states and recovers the execution of programs in it, and the
service provided by this VM continues. Then the network connection is redirected to the new
VM and the dependency to the source host is cleared. The whole migration process finishes by
removing the original VM from the source host.
Figure 3.21 shows the effect on the data transmission rate (Mbit/second) of live migration of a
VM from one host to another. Before copying the VM with 512 KB files for 100 clients, the data
throughput was 870 MB/second. The first precopy takes 63 seconds, during which the rate is
reduced to 765 MB/second. Then the data rate reduces to 694 MB/second in 9.8 seconds for more
iterations of the copying process. The system experiences only 165 ms of downtime, before the
VM is restored at the destination host. This experimental result shows a very small migration
overhead in live transfer of a VM between host nodes. This is critical to achieve dynamic cluster
reconfiguration and disaster recovery as needed in cloud computing. We will study these techniques
in more detail in Chapter 4.
With the emergence of widespread cluster computing more than a decade ago, many cluster con-
figuration and management systems have been developed to achieve a range of goals. These goals
naturally influence individual approaches to cluster management. VM technology has become a
popular method for simplifying management and sharing of physical computing resources. Platforms
Elapsed time (secs)
0
0
200
Throughput (Mbit/sec)
400
600
800
1000
870 Mbit/sec
765 Mbit/sec
9.8 secs
further iterations
1st precopy, 62 secs
694 Mbit/sec
165 ms total down time
Sample over 100ms
Sample over 500ms
Effect of migration on web server transmission rate
512Kb files
100 concurrent clients
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
90
80
130
120
110
100
FIGURE 3.21
Effect on data transmission rate of a VM migrated from one failing web server to another.
(Courtesy of C. Clark, et al. [14] )
3.4 Virtual Clusters and Resource Management
161

such as VMware and Xen allow multiple VMs with different operating systems and configurations
to coexist on the same physical host in mutual isolation. Clustering inexpensive computers is an
effective way to obtain reliable, scalable computing power for network services and compute-
intensive applications
3.4.3 Migration of Memory, Files, and Network Resources
Since clusters have a high initial cost of ownership, including space, power conditioning, and cool-
ing equipment, leasing or sharing access to a common cluster is an attractive solution when
demands vary over time. Shared clusters offer economies of scale and more effective utilization of
resources by multiplexing. Early configuration and management systems focus on expressive and
scalable mechanisms for defining clusters for specific types of service, and physically partition
cluster nodes among those types. When one system migrates to another physical node, we should
consider the following issues.
3.4.3.1 Memory Migration
This is one of the most important aspects of VM migration. Moving the memory instance of a VM
from one physical host to another can be approached in any number of ways. But traditionally, the
concepts behind the techniques tend to share common implementation paradigms. The techniques
employed for this purpose depend upon the characteristics of application/workloads supported by
the guest OS.
Memory migration can be in a range of hundreds of megabytes to a few gigabytes in a typical
system today, and it needs to be done in an efficient manner. The Internet Suspend-Resume (ISR)
technique exploits temporal locality as memory states are likely to have considerable overlap in the
suspended and the resumed instances of a VM. Temporal locality refers to the fact that the memory
states differ only by the amount of work done since a VM was last suspended before being initiated
for migration.
To exploit temporal locality, each file in the file system is represented as a tree of small subfiles.
A copy of this tree exists in both the suspended and resumed VM instances. The advantage of using
a tree-based representation of files is that the caching ensures the transmission of only those files
which have been changed. The ISR technique deals with situations where the migration of live
machines is not a necessity. Predictably, the downtime (the period during which the service is
unavailable due to there being no currently executing instance of a VM) is high, compared to some
of the other techniques discussed later.
3.4.3.2 File System Migration
To support VM migration, a system must provide each VM with a consistent, location-independent
view of the file system that is available on all hosts. A simple way to achieve this is to provide
each VM with its own virtual disk which the file system is mapped to and transport the contents of
this virtual disk along with the other states of the VM. However, due to the current trend of high-
capacity disks, migration of the contents of an entire disk over a network is not a viable solution.
Another way is to have a global file system across all machines where a VM could be located. This
way removes the need to copy files from one machine to another because all files are network-
accessible.
162
CHAPTER 3 Virtual Machines and Virtualization of Clusters and Data Centers

A distributed file system is used in ISR serving as a transport mechanism for propagating a
suspended VM state. The actual file systems themselves are not mapped onto the distributed file
system. Instead, the VMM only accesses its local file system. The relevant VM files are explicitly
copied into the local file system for a resume operation and taken out of the local file system for a
suspend operation. This approach relieves developers from the complexities of implementing several
different file system calls for different distributed file systems. It also essentially disassociates the
VMM from any particular distributed file system semantics. However, this decoupling means that
the VMM has to store the contents of each VM’s virtual disks in its local files, which have to be
moved around with the other state information of that VM.
In smart copying, the VMM exploits spatial locality. Typically, people often move between the
same small number of locations, such as their home and office. In these conditions, it is possible to
transmit only the difference between the two file systems at suspending and resuming locations. This
technique significantly reduces the amount of actual physical data that has to be moved. In situations
where there is no locality to exploit, a different approach is to synthesize much of the state at the resum-
ing site. On many systems, user files only form a small fraction of the actual data on disk. Operating
system and application software account for the majority of storage space. The proactive state transfer
solution works in those cases where the resuming site can be predicted with reasonable confidence.
3.4.3.3 Network Migration
A migrating VM should maintain all open network connections without relying on forwarding
mechanisms on the original host or on support from mobility or redirection mechanisms. To enable
remote systems to locate and communicate with a VM, each VM must be assigned a virtual IP
address known to other entities. This address can be distinct from the IP address of the host machine
where the VM is currently located. Each VM can also have its own distinct virtual MAC address.
The VMM maintains a mapping of the virtual IP and MAC addresses to their corresponding VMs. In
general, a migrating VM includes all the protocol states and carries its IP address with it.
If the source and destination machines of a VM migration are typically connected to a single
switched LAN, an unsolicited ARP reply from the migrating host is provided advertising that the IP
has moved to a new location. This solves the open network connection problem by reconfiguring
all the peers to send future packets to a new location. Although a few packets that have already
been transmitted might be lost, there are no other problems with this mechanism. Alternatively, on
a switched network, the migrating OS can keep its original Ethernet MAC address and rely on the
network switch to detect its move to a new port.
Live migration means moving a VM from one physical node to another while keeping its OS
environment and applications unbroken. This capability is being increasingly utilized in today’s enter-
prise environments to provide efficient online system maintenance, reconfiguration, load balancing,
and proactive fault tolerance. It provides desirable features to satisfy requirements for computing
resources in modern computing systems, including server consolidation, performance isolation, and
ease of management. As a result, many implementations are available which support the feature using
disparate functionalities. Traditional migration suspends VMs before the transportation and then
resumes them at the end of the process. By importing the precopy mechanism, a VM could be live-
migrated without stopping the VM and keep the applications running during the migration.
Live migration is a key feature of system virtualization technologies. Here, we focus on VM
migration within a cluster environment where a network-accessible storage system, such as storage
3.4 Virtual Clusters and Resource Management
163

area network (SAN) or network attached storage (NAS), is employed. Only memory and CPU status
needs to be transferred from the source node to the target node. Live migration techniques mainly
use the precopy approach, which first transfers all memory pages, and then only copies modified pages
during the last round iteratively. The VM service downtime is expected to be minimal by using iterative
copy operations. When applications’ writable working set becomes small, the VM is suspended and
only the CPU state and dirty pages in the last round are sent out to the destination.
In the precopy phase, although a VM service is still available, much performance degradation will
occur because the migration daemon continually consumes network bandwidth to transfer dirty pages in
each round. An adaptive rate limiting approach is employed to mitigate this issue, but total migration time
is prolonged by nearly 10 times. Moreover, the maximum number of iterations must be set because not all
applications’ dirty pages are ensured to converge to a small writable working set over multiple rounds.
In fact, these issues with the precopy approach are caused by the large amount of transferred
data during the whole migration process. A checkpointing/recovery and trace/replay approach (CR/
TR-Motion) is proposed to provide fast VM migration. This approach transfers the execution trace
file in iterations rather than dirty pages, which is logged by a trace daemon. Apparently, the total
size of all log files is much less than that of dirty pages. So, total migration time and downtime of
migration are drastically reduced. However, CR/TR-Motion is valid only when the log replay rate is
larger than the log growth rate. The inequality between source and target nodes limits the applica-
tion scope of live migration in clusters.
Another strategy of postcopy is introduced for live migration of VMs. Here, all memory pages are
transferred only once during the whole migration process and the baseline total migration time is
reduced. But the downtime is much higher than that of precopy due to the latency of fetching pages
from the source node before the VM can be resumed on the target. With the advent of multicore or
many-core machines, abundant CPU resources are available. Even if several VMs reside on a same mul-
ticore machine, CPU resources are still rich because physical CPUs are frequently amenable to multi-
plexing. We can exploit these copious CPU resources to compress page frames and the amount of
transferred data can be significantly reduced. Memory compression algorithms typically have little
memory overhead. Decompression is simple and very fast and requires no memory for decompression.
3.4.3.4 Live Migration of VM Using Xen
In Section 3.2.1, we studied Xen as a VMM or hypervisor, which allows multiple commodity OSes to
share x86 hardware in a safe and orderly fashion. The following example explains how to perform live
migration of a VM between two Xen-enabled host machines. Domain 0 (or Dom0) performs tasks to
create, terminate, or migrate to another host. Xen uses a send/recv model to transfer states across VMs.
Example 3.8 Live Migration of VMs between Two Xen-Enabled Hosts
Xen supports live migration. It is a useful feature and natural extension to virtualization platforms that
allows for the transfer of a VM from one physical machine to another with little or no downtime of the
services hosted by the VM. Live migration transfers the working state and memory of a VM across a net-
work when it is running. Xen also supports VM migration by using a mechanism called Remote Direct
Memory Access (RDMA).
RDMA speeds up VM migration by avoiding TCP/IP stack processing overhead. RDMA implements a
different transfer protocol whose origin and destination VM buffers must be registered before any transfer
164
CHAPTER 3 Virtual Machines and Virtualization of Clusters and Data Centers

operations occur, reducing it to a “one-sided” interface. Data communication over RDMA does not need to
involve the CPU, caches, or context switches. This allows migration to be carried out with minimal impact
on guest operating systems and hosted applications. Figure 3.22 shows the a compression scheme for VM
migration.
This design requires that we make trade-offs between two factors. If an algorithm embodies expecta-
tions about the kinds of regularities in the memory footprint, it must be very fast and effective. A single
compression algorithm for all memory data is difficult to achieve the win-win status that we expect.
Therefore, it is necessary to provide compression algorithms to pages with different kinds of regularities.
The structure of this live migration system is presented in Dom0.
Migration daemons running in the management VMs are responsible for performing migration. Shadow
page tables in the VMM layer trace modifications to the memory page in migrated VMs during the precopy
phase. Corresponding flags are set in a dirty bitmap. At the start of each precopy round, the bitmap is
sent to the migration daemon. Then, the bitmap is cleared and the shadow page tables are destroyed and
re-created in the next round. The system resides in Xen’s management VM. Memory pages denoted by
bitmap are extracted and compressed before they are sent to the destination. The compressed data is
then decompressed on the target.
3.4.4 Dynamic Deployment of Virtual Clusters
Table 3.5 summarizes four virtual cluster research projects. We briefly introduce them here just
to identify their design objectives and reported results. The Cellular Disco at Stanford is a virtual
cluster built in a shared-memory multiprocessor system. The INRIA virtual cluster was built to test
parallel algorithm performance. The COD and VIOLIN clusters are studied in forthcoming examples.
Source node
Target node
Migration
daemon
CBC
compression
Migration
daemon
CBC
compression
VM
Dom0
Shadow page table
Dirty
bitmap
VMM
Hardware
VMM
Hardware
FIGURE 3.22
Live migration of VM from the Dom0 domain to a Xen-enabled target host.
3.4 Virtual Clusters and Resource Management
165

Example 3.9 The Cluster-on-Demand (COD) Project at Duke University
Developed by researchers at Duke University, the COD (Cluster-on-Demand) project is a virtual cluster
management system for dynamic allocation of servers from a computing pool to multiple virtual clusters
[12]. The idea is illustrated by the prototype implementation of the COD shown in Figure 3.23. The COD
Table 3.5 Experimental Results on Four Research Virtual Clusters
Project Name
Design Objectives
Reported Results and
References
Cluster-on-Demand at Duke
Univ.
Dynamic resource allocation with a
virtual cluster management system
Sharing of VMs by multiple virtual
clusters using Sun GridEngine [12]
Cellular Disco at Stanford Univ.
To deploy a virtual cluster on a
shared-memory multiprocessor
VMs deployed on multiple
processors under a VMM called
Cellular Disco [8]
VIOLIN at Purdue Univ.
Multiple VM clustering to prove the
advantage of dynamic adaptation
Reduce execution time of
applications running VIOLIN with
adaptation [25,55]
GRAAL Project at INRIA in
France
Performance of parallel algorithms
in Xen-enabled virtual clusters
75% of max. performance
achieved with 30% resource
slacks over VM clusters
Physical cluster
COD servers backed by configuration database
Resource
policies
Template
definitions
vCluster
requests
Energy-managed
reserve pool
Web service
vCluster
VCM
VCM
Network boot
automatic configuration
resource negotiation
Database-driven
network install
controlled by
trampoline
Batch pool
vCluster
Dynamic
virtual clusters
Resource
manager
DHCP
Confd
NIS
MyDNS
MySQL
Image upload
Web interface
ACPI
Wake-on-LAN
FIGURE 3.23
COD partitioning a physical cluster into multiple virtual clusters.
(Courtesy of Jeff Chase, et al., HPDC-2003 © IEEE [12] )
166
CHAPTER 3 Virtual Machines and Virtualization of Clusters and Data Centers

partitions a physical cluster into multiple virtual clusters (vClusters). vCluster owners specify the operating
systems and software for their clusters through an XML-RPC interface. The vClusters run a batch schedule
from Sun’s GridEngine on a web server cluster. The COD system can respond to load changes in restruc-
turing the virtual clusters dynamically.
The Duke researchers used the Sun GridEngine scheduler to demonstrate that dynamic virtual clusters
are an enabling abstraction for advanced resource management in computing utilities such as grids. The
system supports dynamic, policy-based cluster sharing between local users and hosted grid services.
Attractive features include resource reservation, adaptive provisioning, scavenging of idle resources, and
dynamic instantiation of grid services. The COD servers are backed by a configuration database. This
system provides resource policies and template definition in response to user requests.
Figure 3.24 shows the variation in the number of nodes in each of three virtual clusters during
eight days of a live deployment. Three application workloads requested by three user groups are labeled
“Systems,” “Architecture,” and “BioGeometry” in the trace plot. The experiments were performed with
multiple SGE batch pools on a test bed of 80 rack-mounted IBM xSeries-335 servers within the Duke clus-
ter. This trace plot clearly shows the sharp variation in cluster size (number of nodes) over the eight days.
Dynamic provisioning and deprovisioning of virtual clusters are needed in real-life cluster applications.
Example 3.10 The VIOLIN Project at Purdue University
The Purdue VIOLIN Project applies live VM migration to reconfigure a virtual cluster environment. Its
purpose is to achieve better resource utilization in executing multiple cluster jobs on multiple cluster
Day1
80
Systems
Architecture
Biogeometry
70
60
50
40
Number of nodes
30
20
10
0
Day2
Day3
Day 4
Time
Day 5
Day 6
Day 7
Day 8
FIGURE 3.24
Cluster size variations in COD over eight days at Duke University.
(Courtesy of Jeff Chase, et al., HPDC-2003 © IEEE [12] )
3.4 Virtual Clusters and Resource Management
167

domains. The project leverages the maturity of VM migration and environment adaptation technology.
The approach is to enable mutually isolated virtual environments for executing parallel applications on
top of a shared physical infrastructure consisting of multiple domains. Figure 3.25 illustrates the idea
with five concurrent virtual environments, labeled as VIOLIN 1–5, sharing two physical clusters.
The squares of various shadings represent the VMs deployed in the physical server nodes. The
major contribution by the Purdue group is to achieve autonomic adaptation of the virtual computation
environments as active, integrated entities. A virtual execution environment is able to relocate itself
across the infrastructure, and can scale its share of infrastructural resources. The adaptation is
transparent to both users of virtual environments and administrations of infrastructures. The adaptation
overhead is maintained at 20 sec out of 1,200 sec in solving a large NEMO3D problem of 1 million
particles.
The message being conveyed here is that the virtual environment adaptation can enhance resource
utilization significantly at the expense of less than 1 percent of an increase in total execution time. The
With adaptation
Domain 1
Time
Domain 2
Domain 1
1. Initially VIOLIN
 
1, 2, 3 are computing.
2. After VIOLIN 2
 
is finished,
 
before adaptation
4. After VIOLIN
 
4, 5 are created
5. After VIOLIN
 
1, 3 are finished
3. After adaptation
Domain 2
Without adaptation
VIOLIN 1
VIOLIN 2
VIOLIN 3
VIOLIN 4
VIOLIN 5
FIGURE 3.25
VIOLIN adaptation scenario of five virtual environments sharing two hosted clusters. Note that there are
more idle squares (blank nodes) before and after the adaptation.
(Courtesy of P. Ruth, et al. [55])
168
CHAPTER 3 Virtual Machines and Virtualization of Clusters and Data Centers

migration of VIOLIN environments does pay off. Of course, the gain in shared resource utilization will bene-
fit many users, and the performance gain varies with different adaptation scenarios. We leave readers to
trace the execution of another scenario in Problem 3.17 at the end of this chapter to tell the differences.
Virtual networking is a fundamental component of the VIOLIN system.
3.5 VIRTUALIZATION FOR DATA-CENTER AUTOMATION
Data centers have grown rapidly in recent years, and all major IT companies are pouring their
resources into building new data centers. In addition, Google, Yahoo!, Amazon, Microsoft, HP,
Apple, and IBM are all in the game. All these companies have invested billions of dollars in data-
center construction and automation. Data-center automation means that huge volumes of hardware,
software, and database resources in these data centers can be allocated dynamically to millions of
Internet users simultaneously, with guaranteed QoS and cost-effectiveness.
This automation process is triggered by the growth of virtualization products and cloud com-
puting services. From 2006 to 2011, according to an IDC 2007 report on the growth of virtuali-
zation and its market distribution in major IT sectors. In 2006, virtualization has a market share
of $1,044 million in business and enterprise opportunities. The majority was dominated by pro-
duction consolidation and software development. Virtualization is moving towards enhancing
mobility, reducing planned downtime (for maintenance), and increasing the number of virtual
clients.
The latest virtualization development highlights high availability (HA), backup services,
workload balancing, and further increases in client bases. IDC projected that automation, service
orientation, policy-based, and variable costs in the virtualization market. The total business
opportunities may increase to $3.2 billion by 2011. The major market share moves to the areas
of HA, utility computing, production consolidation, and client bases. In what follows, we will
discuss server consolidation, virtual storage, OS support, and trust management in automated
data-center designs.
3.5.1 Server Consolidation in Data Centers
In data centers, a large number of heterogeneous workloads can run on servers at various times. These
heterogeneous workloads can be roughly divided into two categories: chatty workloads and noninter-
active workloads. Chatty workloads may burst at some point and return to a silent state at some other
point. A web video service is an example of this, whereby a lot of people use it at night and few peo-
ple use it during the day. Noninteractive workloads do not require people’s efforts to make progress
after they are submitted. High-performance computing is a typical example of this. At various stages,
the requirements for resources of these workloads are dramatically different. However, to guarantee
that a workload will always be able to cope with all demand levels, the workload is statically allo-
cated enough resources so that peak demand is satisfied. Figure 3.29 illustrates server virtualization in
a data center. In this case, the granularity of resource optimization is focused on the CPU, memory,
and network interfaces.
3.5 Virtualization for Data-Center Automation
169

Therefore, it is common that most servers in data centers are underutilized. A large amount of
hardware, space, power, and management cost of these servers is wasted. Server consolidation is an
approach to improve the low utility ratio of hardware resources by reducing the number of physical
servers. Among several server consolidation techniques such as centralized and physical consolida-
tion, virtualization-based server consolidation is the most powerful. Data centers need to optimize
their resource management. Yet these techniques are performed with the granularity of a full server
machine, which makes resource management far from well optimized. Server virtualization enables
smaller resource allocation than a physical machine.
In general, the use of VMs increases resource management complexity. This causes a challenge
in terms of how to improve resource utilization as well as guarantee QoS in data centers. In detail,
server virtualization has the following side effects:
•
Consolidation enhances hardware utilization. Many underutilized servers are consolidated into
fewer servers to enhance resource utilization. Consolidation also facilitates backup services and
disaster recovery.
•
This approach enables more agile provisioning and deployment of resources. In a virtual
environment, the images of the guest OSes and their applications are readily cloned and reused.
•
The total cost of ownership is reduced. In this sense, server virtualization causes deferred
purchases of new servers, a smaller data-center footprint, lower maintenance costs, and lower
power, cooling, and cabling requirements.
•
This approach improves availability and business continuity. The crash of a guest OS has no
effect on the host OS or any other guest OS. It becomes easier to transfer a VM from one
server to another, because virtual servers are unaware of the underlying hardware.
To automate data-center operations, one must consider resource scheduling, architectural support,
power management, automatic or autonomic resource management, performance of analytical mod-
els, and so on. In virtualized data centers, an efficient, on-demand, fine-grained scheduler is one of
the key factors to improve resource utilization. Scheduling and reallocations can be done in a wide
range of levels in a set of data centers. The levels match at least at the VM level, server level,
and data-center level. Ideally, scheduling and resource reallocations should be done at all levels.
However, due to the complexity of this, current techniques only focus on a single level or, at most,
two levels.
Dynamic CPU allocation is based on VM utilization and application-level QoS metrics. One
method considers both CPU and memory flowing as well as automatically adjusting resource over-
head based on varying workloads in hosted services. Another scheme uses a two-level resource
management system to handle the complexity involved. A local controller at the VM level and a
global controller at the server level are designed. They implement autonomic resource allocation via
the interaction of the local and global controllers. Multicore and virtualization are two cutting tech-
niques that can enhance each other.
However, the use of CMP is far from well optimized. The memory system of CMP is a typical
example. One can design a virtual hierarchy on a CMP in data centers. One can consider protocols
that minimize the memory access time, inter-VM interferences, facilitating VM reassignment, and
supporting inter-VM sharing. One can also consider a VM-aware power budgeting scheme using
multiple managers integrated to achieve better power management. The power budgeting policies
cannot ignore the heterogeneity problems. Consequently, one must address the trade-off of power
saving and data-center performance.
170
CHAPTER 3 Virtual Machines and Virtualization of Clusters and Data Centers

3.5.2 Virtual Storage Management
The term “storage virtualization” was widely used before the renaissance of system virtualization. Yet
the term has a different meaning in a system virtualization environment. Previously, storage virtualiza-
tion was largely used to describe the aggregation and repartitioning of disks at very coarse time scales
for use by physical machines. In system virtualization, virtual storage includes the storage managed by
VMMs and guest OSes. Generally, the data stored in this environment can be classified into two cate-
gories: VM images and application data. The VM images are special to the virtual environment, while
application data includes all other data which is the same as the data in traditional OS environments.
The most important aspects of system virtualization are encapsulation and isolation. Traditional
operating systems and applications running on them can be encapsulated in VMs. Only one operating
system runs in a virtualization while many applications run in the operating system. System virtuali-
zation allows multiple VMs to run on a physical machine and the VMs are completely isolated. To
achieve encapsulation and isolation, both the system software and the hardware platform, such as
CPUs and chipsets, are rapidly updated. However, storage is lagging. The storage systems become
the main bottleneck of VM deployment.
In virtualization environments, a virtualization layer is inserted between the hardware and tradi-
tional operating systems or a traditional operating system is modified to support virtualization. This
procedure complicates storage operations. On the one hand, storage management of the guest OS per-
forms as though it is operating in a real hard disk while the guest OSes cannot access the hard disk
directly. On the other hand, many guest OSes contest the hard disk when many VMs are running on a
single physical machine. Therefore, storage management of the underlying VMM is much more com-
plex than that of guest OSes (traditional OSes).
In addition, the storage primitives used by VMs are not nimble. Hence, operations such as remap-
ping volumes across hosts and checkpointing disks are frequently clumsy and esoteric, and sometimes
simply unavailable. In data centers, there are often thousands of VMs, which cause the VM images to
become flooded. Many researchers tried to solve these problems in virtual storage management. The
main purposes of their research are to make management easy while enhancing performance and redu-
cing the amount of storage occupied by the VM images. Parallax is a distributed storage system custo-
mized for virtualization environments. Content Addressable Storage (CAS) is a solution to reduce the
total size of VM images, and therefore supports a large set of VM-based systems in data centers.
Since traditional storage management techniques do not consider the features of storage in virtualization
environments, Parallax designs a novel architecture in which storage features that have traditionally been
implemented directly on high-end storage arrays and switchers are relocated into a federation of storage
VMs. These storage VMs share the same physical hosts as the VMs that they serve. Figure 3.30 provides
an overview of the Parallax system architecture. It supports all popular system virtualization techniques,
such as paravirtualization and full virtualization. For each physical machine, Parallax customizes a special
storage appliance VM. The storage appliance VM acts as a block virtualization layer between individual
VMs and the physical storage device. It provides a virtual disk for each VM on the same physical machine.
Example 3.11 Parallax Providing Virtual Disks to Client VMs from a Large Common
Shared Physical Disk
The architecture of Parallax is scalable and especially suitable for use in cluster-based environments.
Figure 3.26 shows a high-level view of the structure of a Parallax-based cluster. A cluster-wide administrative
domain manages all storage appliance VMs, which makes storage management easy. The storage appliance
3.5 Virtualization for Data-Center Automation
171

VM also allows functionality that is currently implemented within data-center hardware to be pushed out and
implemented on individual hosts. This mechanism enables advanced storage features such as snapshot
facilities to be implemented in software and delivered above commodity network storage targets.
Parallax itself runs as a user-level application in the storage appliance VM. It provides virtual disk images
(VDIs) to VMs. A VDI is a single-writer virtual disk which may be accessed in a location-transparent manner
from any of the physical hosts in the Parallax cluster. The VDIs are the core abstraction provided by Parallax.
Parallax uses Xen’s block tap driver to handle block requests and it is implemented as a tapdisk library. This
library acts as a single block virtualization service for all client VMs on the same physical host. In the Parallax
system, it is the storage appliance VM that connects the physical hardware device for block and network
access. As shown in Figure 3.30, physical device drivers are included in the storage appliance VM. This imple-
mentation enables a storage administrator to live-upgrade the block device drivers in an active cluster.
3.5.3 Cloud OS for Virtualized Data Centers
Data centers must be virtualized to serve as cloud providers. Table 3.6 summarizes four virtual
infrastructure (VI) managers and OSes. These VI managers and OSes are specially tailored for
virtualizing data centers which often own a large number of servers in clusters. Nimbus, Eucalyptus,
Storage
appliance
VM
Physical hosts
VM
VMM (Xen)
VMM (Xen)
VMM (Xen)
VM
VM
Storage
appliance
VM
VM
VM
VM
Storage
appliance
VM
VM
VM
VM
Storage administration domain
Storage functionality such as snapshot
facilities that are traditionally
implemented within storage devices
are pushed out into per-host storage
appliance VMs, which interact with a
simple shared block device and may
also use local physical disks.
Shared block device
Any network block device
may be used: FC, iSCSI,
AoE, GNBD, NFS-based
file, Petal, etc.
FIGURE 3.26
Parallax is a set of per-host storage appliances that share access to a common block device and presents
virtual disks to client VMs.
(Courtesy of D. Meyer, et al. [43] )
172
CHAPTER 3 Virtual Machines and Virtualization of Clusters and Data Centers

and OpenNebula are all open source software available to the general public. Only vSphere 4 is a
proprietary OS for cloud resource virtualization and management over data centers.
These VI managers are used to create VMs and aggregate them into virtual clusters as elastic
resources. Nimbus and Eucalyptus support essentially virtual networks. OpenNebula has additional
features to provision dynamic resources and make advance reservations. All three public VI
managers apply Xen and KVM for virtualization. vSphere 4 uses the hypervisors ESX and ESXi
from VMware. Only vSphere 4 supports virtual storage in addition to virtual networking and data
protection. We will study Eucalyptus and vSphere 4 in the next two examples.
Example 3.12 Eucalyptus for Virtual Networking of Private Cloud
Eucalyptus is an open source software system (Figure 3.27) intended mainly for supporting Infrastructure
as a Service (IaaS) clouds. The system primarily supports virtual networking and the management of VMs;
virtual storage is not supported. Its purpose is to build private clouds that can interact with end users
through Ethernet or the Internet. The system also supports interaction with other private clouds or public
clouds over the Internet. The system is short on security and other desired features for general-purpose
grid or cloud applications.
The designers of Eucalyptus [45] implemented each high-level system component as a stand-alone
web service. Each web service exposes a well-defined language-agnostic API in the form of a WSDL
document containing both operations that the service can perform and input/output data structures.
Table 3.6 VI Managers and Operating Systems for Virtualizing Data Centers [9]
Manager/
OS,
Platforms,
License
Resources Being
Virtualized, Web
Link
Client
API,
Language
Hypervisors
Used
Public
Cloud
Interface
Special
Features
Nimbus
Linux,
Apache v2
VM creation, virtual
cluster, www
.nimbusproject.org/
EC2 WS,
WSRF, CLI
Xen, KVM
EC2
Virtual
networks
Eucalyptus
Linux, BSD
Virtual networking
(Example 3.12 and
[41]), www
.eucalyptus.com/
EC2 WS,
CLI
Xen, KVM
EC2
Virtual
networks
OpenNebula
Linux,
Apache v2
Management of VM,
host, virtual network,
and scheduling tools,
www.opennebula.org/
XML-RPC,
CLI, Java
Xen, KVM
EC2, Elastic
Host
Virtual
networks,
dynamic
provisioning
vSphere 4
Linux,
Windows,
proprietary
Virtualizing OS for
data centers
(Example 3.13), www
.vmware.com/
products/vsphere/ [66]
CLI, GUI,
Portal, WS
VMware
ESX, ESXi
VMware
vCloud
partners
Data
protection,
vStorage,
VMFS, DRM,
HA
3.5 Virtualization for Data-Center Automation
173

Furthermore, the designers leverage existing web-service features such as WS-Security policies for
secure communication between components. The three resource managers in Figure 3.27 are specified
below:
•
Instance Manager controls the execution, inspection, and terminating of VM instances on the host
where it runs.
•
Group Manager gathers information about and schedules VM execution on specific instance managers,
as well as manages virtual instance network.
•
Cloud Manager is the entry-point into the cloud for users and administrators. It queries node managers
for information about resources, makes scheduling decisions, and implements them by making
requests to group managers.
In terms of functionality, Eucalyptus works like AWS APIs. Therefore, it can interact with EC2. It does
provide a storage API to emulate the Amazon S3 API for storing user data and VM images. It is installed
on Linux-based platforms, is compatible with EC2 with SOAP and Query, and is S3-compatible with SOAP
and REST. CLI and web portal services can be applied with Eucalyptus.
Example 3.13 VMware vSphere 4 as a Commercial Cloud OS [66]
The vSphere 4 offers a hardware and software ecosystem developed by VMware and released in April
2009. vSphere extends earlier virtualization software products by VMware, namely the VMware Workstation,
ESX for server virtualization, and Virtual Infrastructure for server clusters. Figure 3.28 shows vSphere’s
CM
GM
Public
network
Private
network
Cluster A
Cluster B
GM
Private
network
IM
IM
IM
IM
IM
IM
IM
IM
FIGURE 3.27
Eucalyptus for building private clouds by establishing virtual networks over the VMs linking through
Ethernet and the Internet.
(Courtesy of D. Nurmi, et al. [45] )
174
CHAPTER 3 Virtual Machines and Virtualization of Clusters and Data Centers

overall architecture. The system interacts with user applications via an interface layer, called vCenter.
vSphere is primarily intended to offer virtualization support and resource management of data-center
resources in building private clouds. VMware claims the system is the first cloud OS that supports
availability, security, and scalability in providing cloud computing services.
The vSphere 4 is built with two functional software suites: infrastructure services and application
services. It also has three component packages intended mainly for virtualization purposes: vCompute is
supported by ESX, ESXi, and DRS virtualization libraries from VMware; vStorage is supported by VMS and
Future applications
Security
Scalability
Availability
Application
services
VMotion
Storage vMotion
High availability
Fault tolerance
Data recovery
ESX
ESXi
DRS
VMFS
Thin provisioning
Distributed Switch
vNetwork
vStorage
vCompute
Internal cloud
External cloud
vShield zones
VMSafe
DRS
Hot add
Infrastructure
services
Existing applications
App
App
App
App
App
App
App
App
VMware vSphere 4
VMware vCenter Suite
FIGURE 3.28
vSphere/4, a cloud operating system that manages compute, storage, and network resources over
virtualized data centers.
(Courtesy of VMware, April 2010 [72] )
3.5 Virtualization for Data-Center Automation
175

thin provisioning libraries; and vNetwork offers distributed switching and networking functions. These
packages interact with the hardware servers, disks, and networks in the data center. These infrastructure
functions also communicate with other external clouds.
The application services are also divided into three groups: availability, security, and scalability.
Availability support includes VMotion, Storage VMotion, HA, Fault Tolerance, and Data Recovery from
VMware. The security package supports vShield Zones and VMsafe. The scalability package was built with
DRS and Hot Add. Interested readers should refer to the vSphere 4 web site for more details regarding
these component software functions. To fully understand the use of vSphere 4, users must also learn how
to use the vCenter interfaces in order to link with existing applications or to develop new applications.
3.5.4 Trust Management in Virtualized Data Centers
A VMM changes the computer architecture. It provides a layer of software between the operating
systems and system hardware to create one or more VMs on a single physical platform. A VM
entirely encapsulates the state of the guest operating system running inside it. Encapsulated machine
state can be copied and shared over the network and removed like a normal file, which proposes a
challenge to VM security. In general, a VMM can provide secure isolation and a VM accesses hard-
ware resources through the control of the VMM, so the VMM is the base of the security of a virtual
system. Normally, one VM is taken as a management VM to have some privileges such as creating,
suspending, resuming, or deleting a VM.
Once a hacker successfully enters the VMM or management VM, the whole system is in danger.
A subtler problem arises in protocols that rely on the “freshness” of their random number source for
generating session keys. Considering a VM, rolling back to a point after a random number has been
chosen, but before it has been used, resumes execution; the random number, which must be “fresh”
for security purposes, is reused. With a stream cipher, two different plaintexts could be encrypted
under the same key stream, which could, in turn, expose both plaintexts if the plaintexts have suffi-
cient redundancy. Noncryptographic protocols that rely on freshness are also at risk. For example,
the reuse of TCP initial sequence numbers can raise TCP hijacking attacks.
3.5.4.1 VM-Based Intrusion Detection
Intrusions are unauthorized access to a certain computer from local or network users and intrusion
detection is used to recognize the unauthorized access. An intrusion detection system (IDS) is built
on operating systems, and is based on the characteristics of intrusion actions. A typical IDS can be
classified as a host-based IDS (HIDS) or a network-based IDS (NIDS), depending on the data
source. A HIDS can be implemented on the monitored system. When the monitored system is
attacked by hackers, the HIDS also faces the risk of being attacked. A NIDS is based on the flow
of network traffic which can’t detect fake actions.
Virtualization-based intrusion detection can isolate guest VMs on the same hardware platform.
Even some VMs can be invaded successfully; they never influence other VMs, which is similar to
the way in which a NIDS operates. Furthermore, a VMM monitors and audits access requests for
hardware and system software. This can avoid fake actions and possess the merit of a HIDS. There
are two different methods for implementing a VM-based IDS: Either the IDS is an independent
process in each VM or a high-privileged VM on the VMM; or the IDS is integrated into the VMM
176
CHAPTER 3 Virtual Machines and Virtualization of Clusters and Data Centers

and has the same privilege to access the hardware as well as the VMM. Garfinkel and Rosenblum
[17] have proposed an IDS to run on a VMM as a high-privileged VM. Figure 3.29 illustrates
the concept.
The VM-based IDS contains a policy engine and a policy module. The policy framework can
monitor events in different guest VMs by operating system interface library and PTrace indicates
trace to secure policy of monitored host. It’s difficult to predict and prevent all intrusions without
delay. Therefore, an analysis of the intrusion action is extremely important after an intrusion occurs.
At the time of this writing, most computer systems use logs to analyze attack actions, but it is hard to
ensure the credibility and integrity of a log. The IDS log service is based on the operating system ker-
nel. Thus, when an operating system is invaded by attackers, the log service should be unaffected.
Besides IDS, honeypots and honeynets are also prevalent in intrusion detection. They attract and
provide a fake system view to attackers in order to protect the real system. In addition, the attack
action can be analyzed, and a secure IDS can be built. A honeypot is a purposely defective system
that simulates an operating system to cheat and monitor the actions of an attacker. A honeypot can
be divided into physical and virtual forms. A guest operating system and the applications running
on it constitute a VM. The host operating system and VMM must be guaranteed to prevent attacks
from the VM in a virtual honeypot.
Example 3.14 EMC Establishment of Trusted Zones for Protection of Virtual Clusters
Provided to Multiple Tenants
EMC and VMware have joined forces in building security middleware for trust management in distribu-
ted systems and private clouds. The concept of trusted zones was established as part of the virtual
infrastructure. Figure 3.30 illustrates the concept of creating trusted zones for virtual clusters (multiple
Monitored host
APP
APP
Guest OS
PTrace
Virtual machine
IDS
Virtual machine monitor
OS interface library
Policy
framework
Policy engine
Policy module
FIGURE 3.29
The architecture of livewire for intrusion detection using a dedicated VM.
(Courtesy of Garfinkel and Rosenblum, 2002 [17] )
3.5 Virtualization for Data-Center Automation
177

applications and OSes for each tenant) provisioned in separate virtual environments. The physical
infrastructure is shown at the bottom, and marked as a cloud provider. The virtual clusters or infrastruc-
tures are shown in the upper boxes for two tenants. The public cloud is associated with the global user
communities at the top.
The arrowed boxes on the left and the brief description between the arrows and the zoning boxes are
security functions and actions taken at the four levels from the users to the providers. The small circles
between the four boxes refer to interactions between users and providers and among the users
themselves. The arrowed boxes on the right are those functions and actions applied between the tenant
environments, the provider, and the global communities.
Almost all available countermeasures, such as anti-virus, worm containment, intrusion detection,
encryption and decryption mechanisms, are applied here to insulate the trusted zones and isolate the
VMs for private tenants. The main innovation here is to establish the trust zones among the virtual clusters.
Federate
identities with
public clouds
Identity
federation
Virtual
network
security
Access
Mgmt
Segregate and
control user
access
Enable end to
end view of
security events
and compliance
across
infrastructures
Insulate
information
from cloud
providers’
employees
Insulate
information
from other
tenants
Insulate
infrastructure
from malware,
Trojans and
cybercriminals
Anti-malware
Cybercrime
intelligence
Strong
authentication
Data loss
prevention
Encryption &
key mgmt
Tokenization
Security
info. &
event
mgmt
Control and
isolate VM in the
virtual
infrastructure
Virtual infrastructure
Virtual infrastructure
Physical infrastructure
Cloud provider
Tenant
#2
Tenant
#1
APP
APP
OS
OS
APP
APP
OS
OS
FIGURE 3.30
Techniques for establishing trusted zones for virtual cluster insulation and VM isolation.
(Courtesy of L. Nick, EMC [40] )
178
CHAPTER 3 Virtual Machines and Virtualization of Clusters and Data Centers
