406
CHAPTER 11 CLOUD SECURITY
management OS. An overview of the Xoar hypervisor, a version of Xen which breaks the monolithic
Design of the TCB, is discussed in Section 11.12 followed in Section 11.13 by a presentation of a
trusted hypervisor and mobile device security in Section 11.14.
11.1 SECURITY, THE TOP CONCERN FOR CLOUD USERS
Some believe that moving to a computer cloud frees an organization from all concerns related to com-
puter security and eliminates a wide range of threats to data integrity. They believe that cloud security
is in the hands of experts, hence cloud users are better protected than when using their own computing
resources. As we shall see throughout this chapter, these views are not entirely justiﬁed.
Outsourcing computing to a cloud generates major new security and privacy concerns. Moreover,
the Service Level Agreements do not provide adequate legal protection for cloud computer users who
are often left to deal with events beyond their control.
Some cloud users were accustomed to operate inside a secure perimeter protected by a corporate
ﬁrewall. Now they have to extend their trust to the cloud service provider if they wish to beneﬁt from
the economical advantages of utility computing. The transition from a model when users have full
control of all systems where their sensitive information is stored and processed is a difﬁcult one. The
reality is that virtually all surveys report that security is the top concern of cloud users.
Major user concerns are about the unauthorized access to conﬁdential information and the data
theft. Data is more vulnerable in storage, than while it is being processed. Data is kept in storage for
extended periods of time, while during processing it is exposed to threats for relatively short time.
Close attention should be paid to storage server security and to data in transit. There is also the risk
of unauthorized access and data theft posed by rogue employees of a CSP. Cloud users are concerned
about insider attacks because hiring and security screening policies of a CSP are totally opaque to the
outsiders.
The next concerns regard the user control over the lifecycle of data. It is virtually impossible for a
user to determine if data that should have been deleted was actually deleted. Even if deleted, there is no
guarantee that the media was wiped out and the next user is not able to recover conﬁdential data. This
problem is exacerbated as the CSPs rely on seamless backups to prevent accidental data loss. Such
backups are done without user knowledge or consent. During this exercise data records can be lost,
accidentally deleted, or accessible to an attacker.
Lack of standardization is next on the list of concerns. Today there are no inter-operability standards
as discussed in Section 2.7. Important questions do not have satisfactory answers, e.g.: What can be
done when service provided by the CSP is interrupted? How to access critically needed data in case
of a blackout? What if the CSP drastically raises its prices? What is the cost of moving to a different
CSP? It is undeniable that auditing and compliance pose an entirely different set of challenges in
cloud computing. These challenges are not yet resolved. A full audit trail on a cloud is an unfeasible
proposition at this time.
Another, less analyzed user concern is that cloud computing is based on a new technology expected
to evolve in the future. Case in point, autonomic computing is likely to enter the scene. When this
happens self-organization, self-optimization, self-repair, and self-healing could generate additional se-
curity threats. In an autonomic system it will be even more difﬁcult than at the present time to determine
when an action occurred, what was the reason for that action, and how it created the opportunity for an
MODULE 4

11.2 CLOUD SECURITY RISKS
407
attack or for data loss. It is still unclear how autonomic computing can be compliant with privacy and
legal issues.
There is no doubt that multi-tenancy is the root cause of many user concerns. Nevertheless, multi-
tenancy enables a higher server utilization, thus lower costs. The users have to learn to live with
multi-tenancy, one of the pillars of utility computing. The threats caused by multi-tenancy differ from
one cloud delivery model to another. For example, in case of SaaS private information such as name,
address, phone numbers, possibly credit card numbers of many users are stored on one server; when
the security of that server is compromised a large number of users are affected.
Users are also greatly concerned about the legal framework for enforcing cloud computing security.
The cloud technology has moved much faster than cloud security and privacy legislation thus, users
have legitimate concerns regarding the ability to defend their rights. The data centers of a CSP may be
located in several countries and it is unclear what laws apply, the laws of the country where information
is stored and processed, the laws of the countries the information crossed when sent by the user, or the
laws of the user’s country.
To make matter even more complicated, a CSP may outsource handling of personal and/or sensitive
information. Existing laws stating that the CSP must exercise reasonable security may be difﬁcult to
implement in case when there is a chain of outsourcing to companies in different countries. Lastly,
a CSP may be required by law to share private data with law enforcement agencies. For example,
Microsoft was served a subpoena to provide emails exchanges by users of the Hotmail service.
The question is: What cloud users can and should do to minimize the security risks regarding the
data handling by the CSP? First, a user should evaluate the security policies and the mechanisms the
CSP has in place to enforce these policies. Then, the user should analyze the information that would
be stored and processed on the cloud. Finally, the contractual obligations should be clearly spelled out.
The contract between a user and a CSP should [400] state clearly:
1.
CSPs obligations to handle sensitive information and its obligation to comply with privacy laws.
2.
CSP liabilities for mishandling sensitive information, e.g., data loss.
3.
The rules governing ownership of the data.
4.
Specify the geographical regions where information and backups can be stored.
To minimize the security risks a user may try to avoid processing sensitive data on a cloud. The
Secure Data Connector from Google caries out an analysis of the data structures involved and allows
access to data protected by a ﬁrewall. This solution is not feasible for several classes of applications,
e.g., processing of medical or personnel records. The solution may not be feasible when the cloud
processing workﬂow requires cloud access to the entire volume of user data. When the volume of sen-
sitive data or the processing workﬂow requires sensitive data to be stored on the cloud then, whenever
feasible, data should be encrypted [189] and [534].
11.2 CLOUD SECURITY RISKS
Some believe that it is easy, possibly too easy, to start using cloud services without the commitment to
follow the ethics rules for cloud computing and without a proper understanding of the security risks. A
cloud could be used to launch large-scale attacks against other components of the cyber infrastructure.
A ﬁrst question is: How the nefarious use of cloud resources can be prevented?

408
CHAPTER 11 CLOUD SECURITY
The next question is: What are the security risks faced by cloud users? There are multiple ways to
look at the cloud security risks. A recent paper identiﬁes three broad classes [109]: traditional security
threats, threats related to system availability, and threats related to third-party data control.
Traditional threats are those experienced for some time by any system connected to the Internet, but
with some cloud-speciﬁc twists. The impact of traditional threats is ampliﬁed due to the vast amount of
cloud resources and the large user population that can be affected. The long list of cloud user concerns
includes also the fuzzy bounds of responsibility between the providers of cloud services and users, as
well as the difﬁculties to accurately identify the cause of a problem.
The traditional threats begin at the user site. The user must protect the infrastructure used to connect
to the cloud and to interact with the application running on the cloud. This task is more difﬁcult because
some components of this infrastructure are outside the ﬁrewall protecting the user.
The next threat is related to authentication and authorization. Procedures in place for one individual
do not extend to an enterprise, the cloud access of the members of an organization must be nuanced.
Different individuals should be assigned distinct levels of privilege based on their role in the organiza-
tion. It is also nontrivial to merge or adapt the internal policies and security metrics of an organization
with the ones of the cloud.
Traditional attacks have already affected cloud service providers. The favorite means of attack are:
distributed denial of service (DDDS) attacks which prevent legitimate users to access cloud services,
phishing, SQL injection, or cross-site scripting. Phishing aims to gain information from a database by
masquerading as a trustworthy entity. Such information could be names and credit card numbers, social
security numbers, other personal information stored by online merchants or by other service providers.
SQL injection is typically used against a web site. An SQL command entered in a web form causes
the contents of a database used by the web site to be either dumped to the attacker or altered. SQL
injection can be used against other transaction processing systems and it is successful when the user
input is not strongly typed or rigorously ﬁltered. Cross-site scripting is the most popular form of attack
against web sites; a browser permits the attacker to insert client-scripts into the web pages and thus,
bypass the access controls at the web site.
Identifying the path followed by an attacker is more difﬁcult in a cloud environment. Cloud servers
host multiple VMs and multiple applications may run under one VM. Multi-tenancy, in conjunction
with hypervisor vulnerabilities, could open new attack channels for malicious users. Traditional inves-
tigation methods based on digital forensics cannot be extended to a cloud where resources are shared
among a large user population and traces of events related to a security incident are wiped out due to
the high rate of write operations.
Availability of cloud services is another major concern. System failures, power outages, and other
catastrophic events could shutdown cloud services for extended periods of time. Data lock-in discussed
in Section 2.7 could prevent a large organization whose business model depends on these data to
function properly, when such a rare event occurs.
Clouds can also be affected by phase transition phenomena and other effects speciﬁc to complex
systems. Another critical aspect of availability is that the users cannot be assured that an application
hosted on the cloud returns correct results.
Third-party control generates a spectrum of concerns caused by lack of transparency and limited
user control. For example, a cloud provider may subcontract some resources from a third party whose
level of trust is questionable. There are examples when subcontractors failed to maintain the customer

11.2 CLOUD SECURITY RISKS
409
data. There are also examples when the third party was not a subcontractor but a hardware supplier and
the loss of data was caused by poor quality storage devices [109].
Storing proprietary data on the cloud is risky as cloud provider espionage poses real dangers. The
terms of contractual obligations usually place all responsibilities for data security with the user. The
Amazon Web Services customer agreement does not help user’s conﬁdence as it states “We ...will
not be liable to you for any direct, indirect, incidental,.... damages.... nor... be responsible for any
compensation, reimbursement, arising in connection with: (A) your inability to use the services... (B)
the cost of procurement of substitute goods or services..or (D) any unauthorized access to, alteration
of, or deletion, destruction, damage, loss or failure to store any of your content or other data.”
It is very difﬁcult for a cloud user to prove that data has been deleted by the service provider. The
lack of transparency makes auditability a very difﬁcult proposition for cloud computing. Auditing
guidelines elaborated by the National Institute of Standards (NIST) such as the Federal Informa-
tion Processing Standard (FIPS) and the Federal Information Security Management Act (FISMA) are
mandatory for US Government agencies.
The 2010 Cloud Security Alliance (CSA) report. The report identiﬁes seven top threats to cloud
computing. These threats are: the abusive use of the cloud, APIs that are not fully secure, malicious
insiders, shared technology, account hijacking, data loss or leakage, and unknown risk proﬁle [123].
According to this report the IaaS delivery model can be affected by all threats. PaaS can be the affected
by all, but the shared technology, while SaaS is affected by all, but abuse and shared technology.
Abusing the cloud refers to conducting nefarious activities from the cloud. For example, use multi-
ple AWS instances or applications supported by IaaS to launch distributed denial of service attacks or
to distribute spam and malware. Shared technology considers threats due to multi-tenant access sup-
ported by virtualization. Hypervisors can have ﬂaws allowing a guest OS to affect the security of the
platform shared with other VMs.
Insecure APIs may not protect the users during a range of activities starting with authentication
and access control to monitoring and control of the application during runtime. The cloud service
providers do not disclose their hiring standards and policies thus, the risks of malicious insiders cannot
be ignored. The potential harm due to this particular form of attacks is high.
Data loss and data leakage are two risks with devastating consequences for an individual or an
organization using cloud services. Maintaining copies of the data outside the cloud is often unfeasible
due to the sheer volume of data. If the only copy of the data is stored on the cloud, then sensitive data
is permanently lost when cloud data replication fails followed by a storage media failure. As some of
the data often includes proprietary or sensitive data access to such information by third parties could
have severe consequences.
Account or service hijacking is a signiﬁcant threat and cloud users must be aware of and guard
against all methods to steal credentials. Lastly, unknown risk proﬁle refers to exposure to the ignorance
or underestimation of the risks of cloud computing.
The 2011 CSA report. The report “Security Guidance for Critical Area of Focus in Cloud Computing
V3.0,” provides a comprehensive analysis of the risks and makes recommendations to minimize the
risk in cloud computing [124].
An attempt to identify and classify the attacks in a cloud computing environment is discussed
in [207]. The three actors involved in the model considered are: the user, the service, and the cloud
infrastructure, and there are six types of attacks possible, see Figure 11.1. The user can be attacked

410
CHAPTER 11 CLOUD SECURITY
FIGURE 11.1
Surfaces of attacks in a cloud computing environment.
from two directions, the service and the cloud. Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) certiﬁcate spooﬁng, attacks
on browser caches, or phishing attacks are example of attacks that originate at the service. The user
can also be a victim of attacks that either truly originate or that spoof originating from the cloud
infrastructure.
Buffer overﬂow, SQL injection, and privilege escalation are the common types of attacks from the
service. The service can also be subject of attacks by the cloud infrastructure and this is probably the
most serious line of attack. Limiting access to resources, privilege-related attacks, data distortion, in-
jecting additional operations are only a few of the many possible lines of attacks originated at the cloud.
The cloud infrastructure can be attacked by a user which targets the cloud control system. These
types of attacks are the same a user would direct toward any other cloud service. The cloud infrastruc-
ture may also be targeted by a service requesting an excessive amount of resources and causing the
exhaustion of the resources.
Top twelve cloud security threats. The 2016 CSA report lists the top security threats [414]:
1.
Data breaches. The most damaging breaches are for sensitive data including ﬁnancial and health
information, trade secrets, and intellectual property. The ultimate responsibility rests with the orga-
nizations maintaining data on the cloud and CSA recommends that organizations use multi-factor
authentication and encryption to protect against data breaches. Multi-factor authentication such
as one-time passwords, phone-based authentication, and smart card protection make it harder for
attackers to use stolen credentials.

11.3 PRIVACY AND PRIVACY IMPACT ASSESSMENT
411
2.
Compromised credentials and broken authentication. Such attacks are due to lax authentication,
weak passwords, and poor key and/or certiﬁcate management.
3.
Hacked interfaces and APIs. Cloud security and service availability can be compromised by a weak
API. When third parties rely on APIs more services and credentials are exposed.
4.
Exploited system vulnerabilities. Resource sharing and multi-tenancy create new attack surfaces
but the cost to discover and repair vulnerabilities is small compared to the potential damage.
5.
Account hijacking. All accounts should be monitored so that every transaction can be traced to the
individual requesting it.
6.
Malicious insiders. This threat can be difﬁcult to detect and system administrator errors could
sometimes be falsely diagnosed as threats. A good policy is to segregate duties and enforce activi-
ties such as logging, monitoring, and auditing administrator activities.
The other six threats are: advanced persistent threats (APTs), permanent data loss, inadequate diligence,
cloud service abuse, DoS attacks, and shared technology.
An update of the “Cloud Controls Matrix” spells out the impact of control speciﬁcations on cloud
architecture, cloud delivery models, and other aspects of the cloud ecosystem, according to https://
cloudsecurityalliance.org/download/cloud-controls-matrix-v3-0-1/.
Cloud vulnerability incidents reported over a period of four years and data breach incidents in 2014
identiﬁed several other threats including: hardware failures, natural disasters, cloud-related malware,
inadequate infrastructure design and planning, point-of-sale (POS) intrusions and payment card skim-
mers, crimeware and cyber-espionage, insider and privilege misuse, web app attacks, and physical
theft/loss [480].
11.3 PRIVACY AND PRIVACY IMPACT ASSESSMENT
The term privacy refers to the right of an individual, a group of individuals, or an organization to keep
information of personal nature or proprietary information from being disclosed. Many nations view
privacy as a basic human right. The Universal Declaration of Human Rights, article 12, states: “No one
shall be subjected to arbitrary interference with his privacy, family, home or correspondence, nor to
attacks upon his honor and reputation. Everyone has the right to the protection of the law against such
interference or attacks.”
The U. S. Constitution contains no express right to privacy, however the Bill of Rights reﬂects the
concern of the framers for protecting speciﬁc aspects of privacy.1 In the United Kingdom privacy is
guaranteed by the Data Protection Act. The European Court of Human Rights has developed many
documents deﬁning the right to privacy.
At the same time, the right to privacy is limited by laws. For example, the taxation laws require
individuals to share information about personal income or earnings. Individual privacy may conﬂict
with other basic human rights e.g., with freedom of speech. The privacy laws differ from country to
1The 1st Amendment covers the protection of beliefs, the 3rd Amendment privacy of homes, the 4th Amendment the privacy
of person and possessions against unreasonable searches, the 5th Amendment the privilege against self-incrimination, thus
the privacy of personal information, and, according to some Justices, the 9th Amendment that reads “The enumeration in the
Constitution, of certain rights, shall not be construed to deny or disparage others retained by the people” can be viewed as a
protection of privacy in ways not explicitly speciﬁed by the ﬁrst eight amendments in the Bill of Rights.

412
CHAPTER 11 CLOUD SECURITY
country; laws in one country may require public disclosure of information considered private in other
countries and cultures.
Digital age has confronted legislators with signiﬁcant challenges related to privacy as new threats
have emerged. For example, personal information voluntarily shared, but stolen from sites granted
access to it or misused can lead to identity theft.
Some countries have been more aggressive in addressing the new privacy concerns than others.
For example, European Union (EU) has very strict laws governing handling of personal data in the
digital age. A sweeping new privacy right, the “right to be forgotten” is codiﬁed as part of a broad new
proposed data protection regulation in EU. This right addresses the problem that it is hard to escape
your past now when every photo, status update, and tweet lives forever on some web site.
Our discussion targets primarily public clouds where privacy has an entirely new dimension as
data, often in an un-encrypted form, resides on servers owned by a CSP. Services based on individual
preferences, location of individuals, membership in social networks, or other personal information
present a special risk. The owner of the data cannot rely exclusively on the CSP to guarantee the
privacy of the data.
Privacy concerns are different for the three cloud delivery models and also depend on the ac-
tual context. For example, consider the widely used Gmail; Gmail privacy policy reads (see http:
//www.google.com/policies/privacy/ accessed on October 6, 2012): “We collect information in two
ways: information you give us... like your name, email address, telephone number or credit card; infor-
mation we get from your use of our services such as:.. device information, ... log information,... location
information,... unique application numbers,... local storage,... cookies and anonymous identiﬁers.... We
will share personal information with companies, organizations or individuals outside of Google if we
have a good-faith belief that access, use, preservation or disclosure of the information is reasonably
necessary to: meet any applicable law, regulation, legal process or enforceable governmental request;
... protect against harm to the rights, property or safety of Google, our users or the public as required or
permitted by law. We may share aggregated, non-personally identiﬁable information publicly and with
our partners like publishers, advertisers or connected sites. For example, we may share information
publicly to show trends about the general use of our services.”
The main aspects of cloud privacy are: the lack of user control, potential unauthorized secondary
use, data proliferation, and dynamic provisioning [400]. The lack of user control refers to the fact that
user-centric data control is incompatible with cloud usage. Once data is stored on the servers of the
CSP the user losses control on the exact location, and in some instances it could lose access to the data.
For example, in case of the Gmail service the account owner has no control on where the data is stored
or how long old Emails are stored on some backups of the servers.
A CSP may obtain revenues from unauthorized secondary usage of the information e.g., for tar-
geted advertising. There are no technological means to prevent this use. Dynamic provisioning refers
to threats due to outsourcing. A range of issues are very fuzzy; for example, how to identify the sub-
contractors of a CSP, what rights to the data they have, and what rights to data are transferable in case
of bankruptcy or merger.
There is the need for legislation addressing the multiple aspects of privacy in the digital age. A doc-
ument elaborated by the Federal Trading Commission for the US Congress states [172]: “Consumer-
oriented commercial web sites that collect personal identifying information from or about consumers
online would be required to comply with the four widely-accepted fair information practices:

11.4 TRUST
413
1.
Notice – web sites should be required to provide consumers clear and conspicuous notice of their
information practices, including what information they collect, how they collect it (e.g., directly or
through non-obvious means such as cookies), how they use it, how they provide Choice, Access,
and Security to consumers, whether they disclose the information collected to other entities, and
whether other entities are collecting information through the site.
2.
Choice – web sites should be required to offer consumers choices as to how their personal identi-
fying information is used beyond the use for which the information was provided, e.g., to consum-
mate a transaction. Such choices would encompass both internal secondary uses (such as marketing
back to consumers) and external secondary uses, such as disclosing data to other entities.
3.
Access – web sites would be required to offer consumers reasonable access to the information a
web site has collected about them, including a reasonable opportunity to review information and
to correct inaccuracies or delete information.
4.
Security – web sites would be required to take reasonable steps to protect the security of the
information they collect from consumers. The Commission recognizes that the implementation of
these practices may vary with the nature of the information collected and the uses to which it is
put, as well as with technological developments. For this reason, the Commission recommends that
any legislation be phrased in general terms and be technologically neutral. Thus, the deﬁnitions of
fair information practices set forth in the statute should be broad enough to provide ﬂexibility to
the implementing agency in promulgating its rules or regulations.”
There is the need for tools capable to identify privacy issues in information systems, the so called
Privacy Impact Assessment (PIA). As of mid 2017 there are no international standards for such a
process, though different countries and organization require PIA reports. An example of an analysis is
to assess the legal implications of the UK-US Safe Harbor process to allow US companies to comply
with the European Directive 95/46/EC2 on the protection of personal data.
Such an assessment forces a proactive attitude towards privacy. An ab initio approach for embed-
ding privacy rules in new systems is preferable to painful changes that could affect the functionality
of existing systems. A PIA tool that could be deployed as web-based service is proposed in [478].
The input to the tool includes: project information, an outline of project documents, privacy risks, and
stakeholders. The tool will produce a PIA report consisting of a summary of ﬁndings, a risk summary,
security, transparency, and cross-borders data ﬂows.
The centerpiece of a PIA tool is a knowledge base (KB) created and maintained by domain experts.
The users of the SaaS service providing access to the PIA tool must ﬁll in a questionnaire. The system
uses templates to generate additional questions necessary to ﬁll in the PIA report. An expert system
infers which rules are satisﬁed by the facts in the database as provided by the users and executes the
rule with the highest priority.
11.4 TRUST
Trust, in the context of cloud computing, is intimately related to the general problem of trust in online
activities. In this section we ﬁrst discuss the traditional concept of trust and then the trust in online
activities.
2See http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:31995L0046:en:HTML.

11.5 CLOUD DATA ENCRYPTION
415
hanging on the wall of a dentist’s ofﬁce is a credential that the individual has been trained by an ac-
credited university and hence capable to perform a set of procedures. A digital signature is a credential
used in many distributed applications.
Policies and reputation are two ways of determining trust. Policies reveal the conditions to obtain
trust, and the actions when some of the conditions are met. Policies require the veriﬁcation of creden-
tials. Reputation is a quality attributed to an entity based on a relatively long history of interactions or
possibly observations of the entity. Recommendations are based on trust decisions made by others and
ﬁltered through the perspective of the entity assessing the trust.
In a computer science context “trust of a party A to a party B for a service X is the measurable
belief of A that B behaves dependably for a speciﬁed period within a speciﬁed context (in relation to
service X),” [376]. An assurance about the operation of particular hardware or software component
leads to persistent social-based trust in that component.
A comprehensive discussion of trust in computer services in the semantic web can be found in [38].
In Section B.1 we discuss the concept of trust in the context of cognitive radio networks where multiple
transmitters compete for communication channels. Then, in Section B.3 we present a cloud-based trust
management service.
11.5 CLOUD DATA ENCRYPTION
The government, large corporations, and individual users ponder if it safe to store sensitive infor-
mation on a public cloud. Encryption is the obvious solution to protect outsourced data and cloud
service providers have been compelled to offer encryption services. For example, Amazon offers AWS
Key Management Service (KMS) to create and control the encryption keys used by clients to encrypt
their data. KMS is integrated with other AWS services including EBS, S3, RDS, Redshift, Elastic
Transcoder, and WorkMail. AWS also offers Encryption SDK for developers.
The seminal RSA paper [424] and the survey of existing public-key crypto systems in [433] are
some of the notable publications in the vast literature dedicated to cryptosystems. Several new research
results in cryptography are important to data security in cloud computing. In 1999 Pascal Paillier pro-
posed a trapdoor mechanism based on composite residuosity classes, i.e., factoring a hard-to-factor
number n = pq where p and q are two large prime numbers [388]. This solution exploits the homo-
morphic properties of composite residuosity classes to design distributed cryptographic protocols. A
major breakthrough are the algorithms for Fully Homomorphic Encryption (FHE) proposed by Craig
Gentry in his seminal 2009 dissertation at Stanford University [189,190]. In recent years, searchable
symmetric encryption protocols have been reported in [86] and [168].
Homomorphic encryption. Sensitive data is safe while in storage, provided that it is encrypted with
strong encryption. But encrypted data must be decrypted for processing and this opens a window of
vulnerability. So a ﬁrst question examined in this section is if it is feasible to operate on encrypted
data. The homomorphic encryption, a long time dream of security experts, reﬂects the concept of
homomorphism, a structure-preserving map f (·) between two algebraic structures of the same type
see Figure 11.2.
When f (·) is a one-to-one mapping, call f −1 : A′ →A the inverse of f (·). Then a = f −1(a′),b =
f −1(b′),c = f −1(c′). In this case we can carry out the composition operation ♦in the target domain

416
CHAPTER 11 CLOUD SECURITY
FIGURE 11.2
A homomorphism f : A →A′ is a structure-preserving map between sets A and A′ with the composition
operations □and ♦, respectively. Let a,b,c ∈A with c = a□b and a′,b′,c′ ∈A′ with c′ = a′♦b′. Let
a′ = f (a),b′ = f (b),c′ = f (c) be the results of the mapping f (·). If f is a homomorphism, then the
composition operation ♦in the target domain A′ produces the same result as mapping the result of the
operation □applied to the two elements in the original domain A: f (a)♦f (b) = f (a□b).
and apply the inverse mapping to get the same result produced by the □composition operation in the
original domain, f −1(a)♦f −1(b) = f (a□b), as shown in Figure 11.2.
In case of homomorphic encryption the mapping f (·) is a one-to-one transformation, the encryption
procedure; its inverse, f −1(·) is the decryption procedure and the composition operation can be any
arithmetic and logic operation carried out with encrypted data. In this case we can carry arithmetic
and/or logic operations with encrypted data and the decryption of the result of these operations is
identical with the result of carrying out the same operations with the plaintext data. The window of
vulnerability created when data is decrypted for processing disappears.
General computations with encrypted data are theoretically feasible using FHE algorithms. Unfor-
tunately, the homomorphic encryption is not a practical solution at this time. Existing algorithms for
homomorphic encryption increase the processing time with encrypted data by many orders of magni-
tude compared with processing of plaintext data. A recent implementation of FHE [218] requires about
six minutes per batch; the processing time for a simple operation on encrypted data dropped to almost
one second after improvements in other experiments [154].
Users send a variety of queries to many large databases stored on clouds. Such queries often in-
volve logic and arithmetic functions so an important question is if it is feasible and practical to search
encrypted databases. Application of widely used encryption techniques to database systems could lead
to signiﬁcant performance degradation. For example, if an entire column of a NoSQL database table
contains sensitive information and it is encrypted, then a query predicate with a comparison operator
requires a scan of the entire table to evaluate the query. This is due to the fact that existing encryption
algorithms do not preserve order and database indices such as B-tree can no longer be used.
Order Preserving Encryption. OPE can be used for encryption of numeric data, it maps a range of
numerical values into a much larger and sparse range of values [70]. Let a order-preserving function
f : {1,...,M} →{1,...,N} with N >> M be uniquely represented by a combination of M out of N
ordered items. Given N balls in a bin, M black and N −M white, we draw a ball at random without
replacement at each step. The random variable X describing the total number of balls in our sample
after we collect the k-th black ball follows the negative hypergeometric distribution (NHG). One can

11.6 SECURITY OF DATABASE SERVICES
417
show that a order preserving f (x) for a given point x ∈{1,...,M} has a NHG distribution over a
random choice of f .
To encrypt plaintext x the OPE encryption algorithm performs a binary search down to x. Given the
secret key K the algorithm ﬁrst assigns Encrypt(K,M/2), then Encrypt(K,M/4) if the index m <
M/2 and Encrypt(K,3M/4) otherwise, and so on, until Encrypt(K,x) is assigned. Each ciphertext
assignment is made according to the output of the negative hypergeometric sampling algorithm. One
can prove by strong induction on the size of the plaintext space that the resulting scheme induces a
random order-preserving function from the plaintext to ciphertext space.
To allow efﬁcient range queries on encrypted data, it is sufﬁcient to have an order-preserving
hash function family H (not necessarily invertible). The OPE algorithm would use a secret key
(KEncrypt,KH ) where KEncrypt is a key for a normal (randomized) encryption scheme and KH is
a key for H. Then Encrypt(KEncrypt,x) || H(KH ,x) will be the encryption of x [70].
Searching encrypted databases is of particular interest [11]. Several types of searches are fre-
quently conducted including: single-keyword, multi-keyword, fuzzy-keyword, ranked, authorized, and
veriﬁable search. Searchable symmetric encryption (SSE) is used when an encrypted databases E is
outsourced to a cloud or to a different organization. SSE hides information about the database and the
queries.
The client only stores the cryptographic key. To search the database the client encrypts the query,
sends it to the database server, receives the encrypted result of the query and decrypts it using the
cryptographic key. The information leakage from these searches is conﬁned to query patterns, while
disclosure of explicit data and query plaintext values is prevented.
An SSE protocol supporting conjunctive search and general Boolean queries on symmetrically
encrypted data was proposed in [86]. This SSE protocol scales to very large databases. It can be used
for arbitrarily structured data including free text search with the moderate and well deﬁned leakage to
the outsourced server. Performance results of a prototype applied to encrypted search over the entire
English Wikipedia are reported. The protocol was extended with support for range, substring, wildcard,
and phrase queries [168].
The next question is if sensitive data stored on the servers of a private cloud is vulnerable. The
threat posed by an outsider attacker is diminished if the private cloud is protected by an effective
ﬁrewall. Nevertheless, there are dangers posed by an insider. If such an attacker has access to log ﬁles
it can infer the location of database hot spots, copy data selectively, and use the data for a nefarious
activity. To minimize the risks posed by an insider, a set of protections rings should be enforced to
restrict the access of each member of the staff to a limited area of the data base.
11.6 SECURITY OF DATABASE SERVICES
Cloud users often delegate control of their data to the database services supported by virtually all
CSP and are concerned with security aspects of DBaaS. The model used to evaluate DBaaS security
includes several groups of entities: data owners, users of data, CSPs, and third party agents or Third
Party Auditors (TPAs).
Data owners and DBaaS users fear compromised integrity and conﬁdentiality, as well as data un-
availability. Insufﬁcient authorization, authentication and accounting mechanisms, inconsistent use of

418
CHAPTER 11 CLOUD SECURITY
encryption keys and techniques, alteration or deletion of records without maintaining backup, and op-
erational failures are the major causes of data loss in DBaaS.
Some data integrity and privacy issues are due to the absence of authentication, authorization and
accounting controls, or poor key management for encryption and decryption. Conﬁdentiality means
that only authorized users should have access to the data. Unencrypted data is vulnerable to bugs,
errors, and attacks from external entities affecting data conﬁdentiality. Insider attacks are another con-
cern for DBaaS users and data owners. Superusers have unlimited privileges and misuse of superuser
privileges poses a considerable threat to conﬁdential data such as medical records, sensitive business
data, proprietary product data, and so on.
Malicious external attackers use spooﬁng, snifﬁng, man-in-the-middle attacks, side channeling and
illegal transactions to launch DoS attacks. Another concern is illegal recovery of data from storage
devices, a side effect of multi-tenancy. CSP often carry out sanitation operations after deleting data
from physical devices, but sophisticated attackers can still recover information from storage devices,
unless a thorough scrubbing operation is carried out. Data is also vulnerable during transfer from the
data owner to the DBaaS through public networks. Encryption before data transmission can reduce the
risks posed to the data in transit to the cloud.
Data provenance, the process of establishing the origin of data and its movement between databases,
uses metadata to determine the data accuracy, but the security assessments are time-sensitive. More-
over, analyzing large provenance metadata graphs is computationally expensive.
Cloud users are not aware of the physical location of their data. This lack of transparency allows
cloud service providers to optimize the use of resources but in case of security breaches it is next to
impossible for users to identify compromised resources. DBaaS users do not have ﬁne-grained control
of the remote execution environment and cannot inspect the execution traces to detect the occurrence
of illegal operations.
To increase availability, performance and to enhance reliability, cloud database services replicate
data. Ensuring consistency among the replicas is challenging. Another critical function of DBaaS is to
carry out timely backups of all sensitive and conﬁdential data to facilitate quick recovery in case of
disasters. Auditing and monitoring are important functions of a DBaaS but generate their own security
risks when delegated to TPAs. Conventional methods for auditing and monitoring demand detailed
knowledge of the network infrastructure and physical devices. Data privacy laws can be violated as
consumers are unaware where the data is actually stored. Privacy laws in Europe and South America
prohibit storing data outside the country of origin.
In summary, DBaaS data availability is affected by several threats including:
•
Resource exhaustion caused by imprecise speciﬁcation of user needs or incorrect evaluation of user
speciﬁcations.
•
Failures of the consistency management; multiple hardware and/or software failures lead to incon-
sistent views of user data.
•
Failure of the monitoring and auditing system.
DBaaS data conﬁdentiality is affected by insider and outsider attacks, access control issues, illegal
data recovery from storage, network breaches, third-party access, inability to establish the provenance
of the data.

11.7 OPERATING SYSTEM SECURITY
419
11.7 OPERATING SYSTEM SECURITY
An operating system allows multiple applications to share the hardware resources of a physical system
subject to a set of policies. A critical function of an OS is to protect applications against a wide range
of malicious attacks such as unauthorized access to privileged information, tampering with executable
code, and spooﬁng. Such attacks can target even single-user systems such as personal computers,
tablets, or smart phones. Data brought in the system may contain malicious code; this could be the
case of a Java applet, or of data imported by a browser from a malicious web site.
The mandatory security of an OS is considered to be [295]: “any security policy where the deﬁnition
of the policy logic and the assignment of security attributes is tightly controlled by a system security
policy administrator.” Access control, authentication usage, and cryptographic usage policies are all
elements of the mandatory OS security.
Access control policies specify how OS controls access to different system objects, authentication
usage deﬁnes the authentication mechanisms used by the OS to authenticate a principal, and crypto-
graphic usage policies specify the cryptographic mechanisms used to protect the data. A necessary but
not sufﬁcient condition for security is that the subsystems tasked to perform security-related functions
are tamper-proof and cannot be bypassed. An OS should conﬁne an application to a unique security
domain.
Applications with special privileges performing security-related functions are called trusted appli-
cations. Such applications should only be allowed the lowest level of privileges required to perform
their functions. For example, type enforcement is a mandatory security mechanism that can be used to
restrict a trusted application to the lowest level of privileges.
Enforcing mandatory security through mechanisms left at user’s discretion can lead to a breach of
security, sometimes due to malicious intent, in other cases due to carelessness, or to lack of under-
standing. Discretionary mechanisms place the burden of security on individual users. Moreover, an
application may change a carefully deﬁned discretionary policy without the consent of the user, while
a mandatory policy can only be changed by a system administrator.
Unfortunately, commercial operating systems do not support multi-layered security. They only dis-
tinguish between a completely privileged security domain and a completely unprivileged one. Some
operating systems, e.g., Windows NT, allow a program to inherit all the privileges of the program
invoking it, regardless of the level of trust in that program.
The existence of trusted paths, mechanisms supporting user interactions with trusted software is
critical for system security. When such mechanisms do not exist malicious software can impersonate
trusted software. Some systems allow servers to authenticate their clients and provide trusted paths for
a few functions, such as login authentication and password changing.
A solution to the trusted path problem is to decompose a complex mechanism in several components
with well-deﬁned roles [295]. For example, the access control mechanism for the application space
could consist of enforcer and decider components. To access a protected object the enforcer will gather
the required information about the agent attempting the access, will pass this information to the decider
together with the information about the object and the elements of the policy decision; ﬁnally, it will
carry out the actions requested by the decider.
A trusted path mechanism is required to prevent malicious software invoked by an authorized ap-
plication to tamper with the attributes of the object and/or with the policy rules. A trusted path is also
required to prevent an impostor from impersonating the decider agent. A similar solution is proposed

420
CHAPTER 11 CLOUD SECURITY
for the cryptography usage which should be decomposed into an analysis of the invocation mechanisms
and an analysis of the cryptographic mechanism.
Another question is how an OS can protect itself and applications running under it from malicious
mobile code attempting to gain access to data and other resources and compromise system conﬁ-
dentiality and/or integrity. Java Security Manager uses the type-safety attributes of Java to prevent
unauthorized actions of an application running in a “sandbox.” Yet, the Java Virtual Machine (JVM)
accepts byte code in violation of language semantics; moreover, it cannot protect itself from tampering
from other applications.
Even if these security problems could be eliminated, the security relies on the ability of the ﬁle
system to preserve the integrity of the Java class code. Requiring digitally signed applets and accept-
ing them only from trusted sources could fail due to the all-or-nothing security model. A solution to
securing mobile communications could be to conﬁne a browser to a distinct security domain.
Specialized closed-box platforms such as the ones on some cellular phones, game consoles, and
Automatic Teller Machines (ATMs) could have embedded cryptographic keys that allow themselves
to reveal their true identity to remote systems and authenticate the software running on them. Such
facilities are not available to open-box platforms, the traditional hardware designed for commodity
operating systems.
A highly secure operating system is necessary but not sufﬁcient. Application-speciﬁc security is
also necessary. Sometimes, security implemented above the operating system is better, e.g., electronic
commerce requires a digital signature on each transaction.
We conclude that commodity operating systems offer low assurance. Indeed, an OS is a complex
software system consisting of millions of lines of code and it is vulnerable to a wide range of malicious
attacks. An OS poorly isolates one application from another; once an application is compromised, the
entire physical platform and all applications running on it can be affected. The platform security level
is thus reduced to the security level of the most vulnerable application running on the platform.
Operating systems provide only weak mechanisms for applications to authenticate one another and
do not have a trusted path between users and applications. These shortcomings add to the challenges of
providing security in a distribute computing environment. For example, a ﬁnancial application cannot
determine if a request comes from an authorized user or from a malicious program; in turn, a hu-
man user cannot distinguish a response from a malicious program impersonating the service from the
response provided by the service.
11.8 VIRTUAL MACHINE SECURITY
The following discussion of VM security is restricted to the traditional system VM model in Fig-
ure 10.1B when a hypervisor controls the access to the hardware. The hybrid and the hosted VM
models shown in Figures 10.1C and D, respectively, expose the entire system to the vulnerability of
the host operating system thus, will not be analyzed.
Virtual security services are typically provided by the hypervisor as shown in Figure 11.3A; another
alternative is to have a dedicated VM providing security service as in Figure 11.3B. A secure TCB
(Trusted Computing Base) is a necessary condition for security in a VM environment. When the TCB
is compromised then the security of the entire system is affected.

11.8 VIRTUAL MACHINE SECURITY
421
FIGURE 11.3
(A) Virtual security services provided by the hypervisor/Virtual Machine Monitor; (B) A dedicated security VM.
The analysis of Xen and vBlades in Sections 10.5 and 10.10 shows that the VM technology provides
a stricter isolation of VMs from one another than the isolation of processes in a traditional operating
system. Indeed, a hypervisor controls the execution of privileged operations and can thus enforce mem-
ory isolation as well as disk and network access.
Hypervisors are considerably less complex and better structured than traditional operating systems
thus, in a better position to respond to security attacks. A major challenge is that a hypervisor sees only
raw data regarding the state of a guest OS while security services typically operate at a higher logical
level, e.g., at the level of a ﬁle rather than a disk block.
A guest OS runs on simulated hardware and the hypervisor has access to the state of all VMs
operating on the same hardware. The state of a guest VM can be saved, restored, cloned, and encrypted
by the hypervisor. Replication can ensure not only reliability but also support security, while cloning
could be used to recognize a malicious application by testing it on a cloned system and observing if it
behaves normally.
We can also clone a running system and examine the effect of potentially dangerous applications.
Another interesting possibility is to have the guest VMs ﬁles moved to a dedicated VM and thus,
protect it from attacks [549]. This solution is possible because inter-VM communication is faster than
communication between two physical machines.
Sophisticated attackers are able to ﬁngerprint VMs and avoid VM honey pots designed to study the
methods of attack. They can also attempt to access VM-logging ﬁles and thus, recover sensitive data;
such ﬁles have to be very carefully protected to prevent unauthorized access to cryptographic keys and
other sensitive data.
We expect to pay some price for the better security provided by virtualization. This price includes:
(i) higher hardware costs because a virtual system requires more resources such as CPU cycles, mem-
ory, disk, and network bandwidth; (ii) the cost of developing hypervisors and modifying the host
operating systems in case of paravirtualization; and (iii) the overhead of virtualization as the hyper-
visor is involved in privileged operations.
VM-based intrusion detection systems such as Livewire and Siren which exploit the three capabil-
ities of a VM for intrusion detection, isolation, inspections, and interposition are surveyed in [549].

422
CHAPTER 11 CLOUD SECURITY
Resource isolation was examined in Section 8.10. Inspection means that the hypervisor has the ability
to review the state of the guest VMs and interposition means that the hypervisor can trap and emu-
late the privileged instruction issued by the guest VMs. VM-based intrusion prevention systems such
as, SVFS, NetTop, and IntroVirt, and surveys Terra, a VM-based trust computing platform are also
discussed in [549]. Terra uses a trusted hypervisor to partition resources among VMs.
NIST security group distinguishes two groups of threats, hypervisor-based and VM-based.
There are several types of hypervisor-based threats:
1.
Starvation of resources and denial of service for some VMs. Probable causes: (a) badly conﬁgured
resource limits for some VMs; (b) a rogue VM with the capability to bypass resource limits set in
hypervisor.
2.
VM side-channel attacks: malicious attack on one or more VMs by a rogue VM under the same
hypervisor. Probable causes: (a) lack of proper isolation of inter-VM trafﬁc due to misconﬁguration
of the virtual network residing in the hypervisor; (b) limitation of packet inspection devices to
handle high speed trafﬁc, e.g., video trafﬁc; (c) presence of VM instances built from insecure VM
images, e.g., a VM image having a guest OS without the latest patches.
3.
Buffer overﬂow attacks.
There are also several types of VM-based threats:
1.
Deployment of rogue or insecure VM; unauthorized users may create insecure instances from
images or may perform unauthorized administrative actions on existing VMs. Probable cause:
improper conﬁguration of access controls on VM administrative tasks such as instance creation,
launching, suspension, re-activation and so on.
2.
Presence of insecure and tampered VM images in the VM image repository. Probable causes: (a)
lack of access control to the VM image repository; (b) lack of mechanisms to verify the integrity
of the images, e.g., digitally signed image.
11.9 SECURITY OF VIRTUALIZATION
The complex relationship between virtualization and security has two distinct aspects: virtualization
of security and security of virtualization [302]. In Chapter 10 we praised the virtues of virtualization.
We also discussed two problems associated with virtual environments: (a) the negative effect on per-
formance, due to the additional overhead; and (b) the need for more powerful systems to run multiple
VMs. In this section we take a closer look at the security of virtualization.
The complete state of an operating system running under a VM is captured by the VM. The VM
state can be saved in a ﬁle and then the ﬁle can be copied and shared. There are several useful implica-
tions of this important virtue of virtualization:
1.
Supports the IaaS delivery model. An IaaS user selects an image matching the local application
environment and then uploads and runs the application on the cloud using this image.
2.
Increased reliability. An operating system with all the applications running under it can be repli-
cated and switched to a hot standby in case of a system failure. Recall that a hot standby is a
method to achieve redundancy. The primary and the backup systems, run simultaneously and have
identical state information.
3.
Straightforward mechanisms for implementing resource management policies. An OS and the ap-
plications running under it can be moved to another server to balance the load of a system. For

11.10 SECURITY RISKS POSED BY SHARED IMAGES
425
A hypervisor records the state of a VM to be able to roll it back; this process allows an attacker to
access sensitive data the owner attempted to destroy.
11.10 SECURITY RISKS POSED BY SHARED IMAGES
Even if we assume that a cloud service provider is trustworthy there are other sources of concern many
users either ignore, or underestimate the danger they pose. One of them, especially critical for the IaaS
cloud delivery model, is image sharing. For example, an AWS user has the option to choose between
Amazon Machine Images (AMIs) accessible through the Quick Start or the Community AMI menus
of the EC2 service. The option of using one of these AMIs is especially tempting for a ﬁrst time user,
or for a less sophisticated one.
First, we review the process to create an AMI. We can start from a running system, from another
AMI, or from the image of a VM and copy the contents of the ﬁle system to the S3, a process called
bundling. The ﬁrst of the three steps of bundling is to create an image, the second step is to compress
and encrypt the image, and the last step is to split the image into several segments and then upload the
segments to S3.
Two procedures, ec2-bundle-image and ec2-bundle-volume, are used for creation of an AMI. The
ﬁrst is used for images prepared as loopback ﬁles3 when data is transferred to the image in blocks. To
bundle a running system the creator of the image can use the second procedure when bundling works
at the level of the ﬁle system and ﬁles are copied recursively to the image.
To use an image, a user has to specify the resources, provide the credentials for login, a ﬁrewall
conﬁguration, and specify the region, as discussed in Section 2.3. Once the image is instantiated, the
user is informed about the public DNS and the VM is available. A Linux system can be accessed using
ssh at port 22, while the Remote Desktop at port 3389 is used for Windows.
A recent paper reports on the results of an analysis carried over a period of several months, from
November 2010 to May 2011 of over ﬁve thousand AMIs available through the public catalog at
Amazon [49]. Many analyzed images allowed a user to undelete ﬁles, recover credentials, private keys,
or other types of sensitive information with little effort, using standard tools. The results of this study
were shared with the Amazon’s Security Team which acted promptly to reduce the threats posed to
AWS users.
The details of the testing methodology can be found in [49], here we only discuss the results of
this analysis. The study was able to audit some 5303 images out of the 8448 Linux AMIs and 1202
Windows AMIs at Amazon sites in the US, Europe and Asia. The audit covered software vulnerabilities
and security and privacy risks.
The average duration of an audit was 77 minutes for a Windows image and 21 minutes for a Linux
image; the average disk space used was about 1 GB and 2.7 GB, respectively. The entire ﬁle sys-
tem of a Windows AMI was audited because most of the malware targets Windows systems. Only
3A loopback ﬁle system (LOFS) is a virtual ﬁle system providing an alternate path to an existing ﬁle system. When other ﬁle
systems are mounted onto an LOFS ﬁle system, the original ﬁle system does not change. One useful purpose of LOFS is to take
a CDROM image ﬁle, a ﬁle of type “.iso” and mount it on the ﬁle system and then access it without the need to record a CD-R. It
is somewhat equivalent to the Linux mount-o loop option, but adds a level of abstraction; most commands that apply to a device
can be used to handle the mapped ﬁle.

426
CHAPTER 11 CLOUD SECURITY
directories containing executables for Linux AMIs were scanned; this strategy and the considerably
longer start-up time of Windows explain the time discrepancy of the audits for the two types of
AMIs.
The software vulnerability audit revealed that 98% of the Windows AMIs (249 out of 253) and
58% (2005 out of 3432) Linux AMIs audited had critical vulnerabilities. The average number of
vulnerabilities per AMI were 46 for Windows and 11 for Linux AMIs. Some of AMI images were
rather old; 145,38, and 2 Windows AMIs and 1197,364, and 106 Linux AMIs were older than two,
three, and four years, respectively. The tool used to detect vulnerabilities, the Nessus system, available
from http://www.tenable.com/productus/nessus, classiﬁes the vulnerabilities based on their severity in
four groups, at levels zero to three. The audit reported only vulnerabilities of the highest severity level,
e.g., remote code execution.
Three types of security risks are analyzed: (1) backdoors and leftover credentials, (2) unsolicited
connections, and (3) malware. An astounding ﬁnding is that about 22% of the scanned Linux AMIs
contained credentials allowing an intruder to remotely login to the system. Some 100 passwords, 995
ssh keys, and 90 cases when both could be retrieved were identiﬁed.
To rent a Linux AMI a user must provide the public part of the her ssh key and this key is stored
in the authorized_keys in the home directory. This opens a backdoor for a malicious creator of an AMI
who does not remove her own public key from the image and can remotely login to any instance of this
AMI. Another backdoor is opened when the ssh server allows password-based authentication and the
malicious creator of an AMI does not remove her own password. This backdoor is even wider open as
one can extract the password hashes and then crack the passwords using a tool such as John the Riper,
see http://www.openwall.com/john.
Another threat is posed by the omission of the cloud-init script that should be invoked when the
image is booted. This script provided by Amazon regenerates the host key an ssh server uses to identify
itself; the public part of this key is used to authenticate the server. When this key is shared among
several systems these systems become vulnerable to man-in-the middle attacks.
An attacker impersonates the agents at both ends of a communication channel in the man-in-the
middle attack and makes them believe that they communicate through a secure channel. For example,
if B sends her public key to A, but C is able to intercept it, such an attack proceeds as follows: C sends
a forged message to A claiming to be from B, but instead includes C’s public key. Then A encrypts her
message with C’s key, believing that she is using B’s key, and sends the encrypted message to B. The
intruder, C, intercepts, deciphers the message using her private key, possibly alters the message, and
re-encrypts with the public key B originally sent to A. When B receives the newly encrypted message,
she believes it came from A.
When this script does not run, an attacker can use the NMap tool4 to match the ssh keys discovered
in the AMI images with the keys obtained with NMap. The study reports that the authors were able to
identify more than 2 100 instances following this procedure.
Unsolicited connections pose a serious threat to a system. Outgoing connections allow an outside
entity to receive privileged information, e.g., the IP address of an instance and events recorded by a
4NMap is a security tool running on most operating systems including Linux, Microsoft Windows, Solaris, HP-UX, SGI-IRIX
and BSD variants such as Mac OS X to map the network. Mapping the network means to discover hosts and services in a
network.

11.10 SECURITY RISKS POSED BY SHARED IMAGES
427
syslog daemon to ﬁles in the var/log directory of a Linux system. Such information is available only to
users with administrative privileges.
The audit detected two Linux instances with modiﬁed syslog daemon which forwarded to an outside
agent information about events such as login and incoming requests to a web server. Some of the
unsolicited connections are legitimate, for example, connections to a software update site. It is next to
impossible to distinguish legitimate from malicious connections.
Malware including viruses, worms, spyware, and Trojans were identiﬁed using ClamAV, a software
tool with a database of some 850 000 malware signatures, available from http://www.clamav.net. Two
infected Windows AMIs were discovered, one with a Trojan-Spy (variant 50112) and a second one
with a Trojan-Agent (variant 173287). The ﬁrst Trojan carries out keylogging, and allows stealing data
from the ﬁles system and monitoring processes; the AMI also included a tool to decrypt and recover
passwords stored by the Firefox browser, called Trojan.Firepass.
The creator of a shared AMI assumes some privacy risks. Her private keys, IP addresses, browser
history, shell history, and deleted ﬁles can be recovered from the published images. A malicious agent
can recover the AWS API keys which are not password protected. Then the malicious agent can start
AMIs and run cloud applications at no cost to herself, as the computing charges are passed on to
the owner of the API key. The search can target ﬁles with names such as pk-[0-9A-Z]*.pem or cert-
[0-9A-Z]*.pem used to store API keys.
Another avenue for a malicious agent is to recover ssh keys stored in ﬁles named id_dsa and id_rsa.
Though ssh keys can be protected by a passphrase, the audit determined that the majority of ssh keys
(54 out of 56) were not password protected. A passphrase is a sequence of words used to control access
to a computer system. A passphrase is the analog of a password, but provides added security. For high
security non-military applications NIST recommends an 80-bit strength passphrase. Therefore, a secure
passphrase should consist of at least 58 characters including uppercase and alphanumeric characters.
The entropy of written English is less than 1.1 bits per character.
Recovery of IP addresses of other systems owned by the same user requires access to the lastlog or
the lastb databases. The audit found 187 AMIs with a total of more than 66 000 entries in their lastb
databases. Nine AMIs contained Firefox browser history and allowed the auditor identify the domains
contacted by the user.
612 AMIs contained at least one shell history ﬁle. The audit analyzed 869 history ﬁles named
∼/.history, ∼/.bash_history, and ∼/.sh_history containing some 160 000 lines of command history
and identiﬁed 74 identiﬁcation credentials. The users should be aware that, when the HTTP protocol
is used to transfer information from a user to a web site, the GET requests are stored in the logs of the
web server. Passwords and credit card numbers communicated via a GET request can be exploited by
a malicious agent with access to such logs. When remote credentials, such as the DNS management
password are available then a malicious agent can redirect trafﬁc from its original destination to her
own system.
Recovery of deleted ﬁles containing sensitive information poses another risk for the provider of
an image. When the sectors on the disk containing sensitive information are actually overwritten by
another ﬁle, recovery of sensitive information is much harder. To be safe, the creator of the image effort
should use utilities such as shred, scrub, zerofree or wipe to make recovery of sensitive information
next to impossible. If the image is created with the block-level tool discussed at the beginning of
this section the image will contain blocks of the ﬁle system marked as free; such blocks may contain
information from deleted ﬁles. The audit process was able to recover ﬁles from 98% of the AMIs using

428
CHAPTER 11 CLOUD SECURITY
the exundelete utility. The number of ﬁles recovered from an AMI were as low as 6 and as high as
40 000.
We conclude that the users of published AMIs as well as the providers of images may be vulnerable
to a wide range of security risks and must be fully aware of the dangers posed by image sharing.
11.11 SECURITY RISKS POSED BY A MANAGEMENT OS
We often hear that virtualization enhances security because a VM monitor or hypervisor is considerably
smaller than an operating system. For example, the Xen hypervisor discussed in Section 10.5 has
approximately 60000 lines of code, one to two orders of magnitude fewer than a traditional operating
system.5
A hypervisor supports a stronger isolation between the VMs running under it than the isolation
between processes supported by a traditional operating system. Yet the hypervisor must rely on a
management OS to create VMs and to transfer data in and out from a guest VM to storage devices and
network interfaces.
A small hypervisor can be carefully analyzed, thus one could conclude that the security risks in a
virtual environment are diminished. We have to be cautious with such sweeping statements. Indeed, the
Trusted Computer Base (TCB)6 of a cloud computing environment includes not only the hypervisor
but also the management OS. The management OS supports administrative tools, live migration, device
drivers, and device emulators.
For example, the TCB of an environment based on Xen includes not only the hardware and the
hypervisor, but also the management operating system running in Dom0, see Figure 11.4. System
vulnerabilities can be introduced by both software components, Xen and the management operating
system. An analysis of Xen vulnerabilities reports that 21 of the 23 attacks were against service com-
ponents of the control VM [116]; 11 attacks were attributed to problems in the guest OS caused by
buffer overﬂow and 8 were denial of service attacks. Buffer overﬂow allows execution of arbitrary
code in the privileged mode.
Dom0 manages the building of all user domains (DomU), a process consisting of several steps:
1.
Allocate memory in the Dom0 address space and load the kernel of the guest OS from secondary
storage.
2.
Allocate memory for the new VM and use foreign mapping to load the kernel to the new VM. The
foreign mapping mechanism of Xen is used by Dom0 to map arbitrary memory frames of a VM
into its page tables.
3.
Set up the initial page tables for the new VM.
4.
Release the foreign mapping on the new VM memory, set up the virtual CPU registers, and launch
the new VM.
5The number of lines of code of the Linux operating system evolved in time from 176 250 for Linux 1.0.0, released in March
1995, to 1 800 847 for Linux 2.2.0, released in January 1999, 3 377 902 for Linux 2.4.0, released in January 2001, and to 5 929 913
for Linux 2.6.0, released in December 2003.
6The TCB is deﬁned as the totality of protection mechanisms within a computer system including hardware, ﬁrmware, and,
software. The combination of all these elements is responsible for enforcing a security policy.

11.11 SECURITY RISKS POSED BY A MANAGEMENT OS
429
FIGURE 11.4
The trusted computing base of a Xen-based environment includes the hardware, Xen, and the management
operating system running in Dom0. The management OS supports administrative tools, live migration, device
drivers, and device emulators. A guest OS and applications running under it reside in a DomU.
A malicious Dom0 can play several nasty tricks at the time when it creates a DomU [302]:
•
Refuse to carry out the steps necessary to start the new VM, an action that can be considered a
denial-of-service attack.
•
Modify the kernel of the guest OS in ways that will allow a third party to monitor and control the
execution of applications running under the new VM.
•
Undermine the integrity of the new VM by setting the wrong page tables and/or setup wrong virtual
CPU registers.
•
Refuse to release the foreign mapping and access the memory while the new VM is running.
We now turn our attention to the run-time interaction between Dom0 and a DomU. Recall that
Dom0 exposes a set of abstract devices to the guest operating systems using split drivers; the frontend
of such a driver is in the DomU and its backend in Dom0 and the two communicate via a ring in shared
memory, see Section 10.5.
In the original implementation of Xen a service running in a DomU sends data to, or receives data
from a client located outside the cloud using a network interface in Dom0; it transfers the data to I/O
devices using a device driver in Dom0. Note that later implementations of Xen offer the pass-through
option.
Therefore, we have to ensure that run-time communication through Dom0 is encrypted. Yet, Trans-
port Layer Security (TLS) does not guarantee that Dom0 cannot extract cryptographic keys from the
memory of the OS and applications running in DomU. A signiﬁcant security weakness of Dom0 is that
the entire state of the system is maintained by XenStore, see Section 10.5. A malicious VM can deny

430
CHAPTER 11 CLOUD SECURITY
access to this critical element of the system to other VMs; it can also gain access to the memory of a
DomU. This brings us to additional requirements for conﬁdentiality and integrity imposed on Dom0.
Dom0 should be prohibited to use foreign mapping for sharing memory with a DomU, unless
DomU initiates the procedure in response to a hypercall from Dom0. When this happens, Dom0 should
be provided with an encrypted copy of the memory pages and of the virtual CPU registers. The entire
process should be closely monitored by the hypervisor which, after the access, should check the in-
tegrity of the affected DomU.
A virtualization architecture that guarantees conﬁdentiality, integrity, and availability for the TCB
of a Xen-based system is presented in [302]. A secure environment when Dom0 cannot be trusted can
only be ensured if the guest application is able to store, communicate and process data safely. The
guest software should have access to a secure secondary storage on a remote storage server and to the
network interfaces when communicating with the user. A secure run-time system is also needed.
To implement a secure run-time system we have to intercept and control the hypercalls used for
communication between a Dom0 that cannot be trusted and a DomU we want to protect. Hypercalls
issued by Dom0 that do not read from or write to the memory of a DomU or to its virtual registers
should be allowed. Other hypercalls should be restricted either completely or during speciﬁc time
window. For example, hypercalls used by Dom0 for debugging or for the control of the IOMMU should
be prohibited. The Input/Output Memory Management Unit (IOMMU) connects the main memory
with a DMA-capable I/O bus; it maps device-visible virtual addresses to physical memory addresses
and provides memory protection from misbehaving devices.
We cannot restrict some of the hypercalls issued by Dom0, even though they can be harmful to the
security of DomU. For example, foreign mapping and access to the virtual registers are needed to save
and restore the state of DomU. We should check the integrity of DomU after the execution of such
security-critical hypercalls.
New hypercalls are necessary to protect:
1.
The privacy and integrity of the virtual CPU of a VM. When Dom0 wants to save the state of the
VM the hypercall should be intercepted and the contents of the virtual CPU registers should be
encrypted. The virtual CPU context should be decrypted and then an integrity check should be
carried out when DomU is restored.
2.
The privacy and integrity of the VM virtual memory. The page table update hypercall should
be intercepted and the page should be encrypted so that Dome handles only encrypted pages of
the VM. The hypervisor should calculate a hash of all the memory pages before they are saved
by Dom0 to guarantee the integrity of the system. An address translation is necessary because a
restored DomU may be allocated a different memory region [302].
3.
The freshness of the virtual CPU and the memory of the VM. The solution is to add to the hash a
version number.
As expected, the increased level of security and privacy leads to an increased overhead. Measure-
ments reported in [302] show increases by a factor of: 1.7 to 2.3 for the domain build time, 1.3 to 1.5
for the domain save time, and 1.7 to 1.9 for the domain restore time.

11.12 XOAR – BREAKING THE MONOLITHIC DESIGN OF THE TCB
431
11.12 XOAR – BREAKING THE MONOLITHIC DESIGN OF THE TCB
Xoar is a modiﬁed version of Xen designed to boost system security [116]. The security model of
Xoar assumes that the system is professionally managed and that a privileged access to the system
is granted only to system administrators. The model also assumes that administrators have neither
ﬁnancial incentives, nor the desire to violate the user’s trust. Security threats come from a guest VM
which could attempt to violate the data integrity or the conﬁdentiality of another guest VM on the same
platform, or to exploit the code of the guest. Another source of threats are bugs in initialization code of
the management VM.
Xoar is based on microkernel7 design principles. Xoar modularity makes exposure to risk explicit
and allows the guests to conﬁgure the access to services based on their needs. Modularity allows the
designers of Xoar to reduce the size of the permanent footprint of the system and increase the level
of security of critical components. Ability to record a secure audit log is another critical function of a
hypervisor facilitated by a modular design. The design goals of Xoar are:
•
Maintain the functionality provided by Xen.
•
Ensure transparency with existing management and VM interfaces.
•
Tight control of privileges. Each component should only have the privileges required by its function.
•
Minimize the interfaces of all components to reduce the possibility that a component can be used
by an attacker.
•
Eliminate sharing. Make sharing explicit, whenever it cannot be eliminated, to allow meaningful
logging and auditing.
•
Reduce the opportunity of an attack targeting a system component by limiting the time window
when the component runs.
These design principles aim to break the monolithic TCB design of a Xen-based system. Inevitably,
this strategy has an impact on performance, but the implementation should attempt to keep the modu-
larization overhead to a minimum.
A close analysis shows that booting the system is a complex activity, but the fairly large modules
used during booting are no longer needed once the system is up and running. In Section 10.5 we have
seen that XenStore is a critical system component, as it maintains the state of the system thus, it is a
prime candidate for hardening. The ToolStack is only used for management functions and can only be
loaded upon request.
The Xoar system has four types of components: permanent, self-destructing, restarted upon request,
and restarted on timer, see Figure 11.5:
1.
Permanent components. XenStore-State maintains all information regarding the state of the system.
2.
Components used to boot the system; they self-destruct before any user VM is started. The two
components discover the hardware conﬁguration of the server including the PCI drivers and then
boot the system:
7A microkernel (μ-kernel) supports only the basic functionality of an OS kernel including low-level address space management,
thread management, and inter-process communication. Traditional OS components such as device drivers, protocol stacks, and
ﬁle systems are removed from the microkernel and run in user space.

432
CHAPTER 11 CLOUD SECURITY
FIGURE 11.5
Xoar has nine classes of components of four types: permanent, self-destructing, restarted upon request, and
restarted on timer. A guest VM is started using the Toolstack by the Builder and it is controlled by the
XenStore-Logic. The devices used by the guest VM are emulated by the QEMU component.
•
PCIBack – virtualizes access to PCI bus conﬁguration.
•
Bootstrapper – coordinates booting of the system.
3.
Components restarted on each request:
•
XenStore-Logic
•
Toolstack – handles VM management requests, e.g., it requests the Builder to create a new guest
VM in response to a user request.
•
Builder – initiates user VMs.
4.
Components restarted on a timer: the two components export physical storage device drivers and
the physical network driver to a guest VM.
•
BlkBack – exports physical storage device drivers using udev8 rules.
•
NetBack – exports the physical network driver.
8udev is the device manager for the Linux kernel.

11.12 XOAR – BREAKING THE MONOLITHIC DESIGN OF THE TCB
433
FIGURE 11.6
Component sharing between guest VM in Xoar. Two VM share only the XenStore components. Each one has a
private version of the BlkBack, NetBack and Toolstack.
Another component, QEMU, is responsible for device emulation. Bootstrapper, PCIBack, and Builder
are the most privileged components, but the ﬁrst two are destroyed once Xoar is initialized. The
Builder is very small, it consists of only 13000 lines of code. XenStore is broken into two compo-
nents, XenStore-Logic and XenStore-State. Access control checks are done by a small monitor module
in XenStore-State. Guest VMs share only the Builder, XenStore-Logic, and XenStore-State, see Fig-
ure 11.6.
Users of Xoar are able to only share service VMs with guest VMs that they control; to do so they
specify a tag on all of the devices of their hosted VMs. Auditing is more secure, whenever a VM is
created, deleted, stopped, or restarted by Xoar the action is recorded in an append-only database on a
different server accessible via a secure channel.
Rebooting provides the means to ensure that a VM is in a known good state. To reduce the overhead
and the increased startup time demanded by a reboot, Xoar uses snapshots instead of rebooting. The
service VM snapshots itself when it is ready to service a request. Similarly, snapshots of all components
are taken immediately after their initialization and before they start interacting with other services or
guest VMs. Snapshots are implemented using a copy-on-write mechanism9 to preserve any page about
to be modiﬁed.
9Copy-on-write (COW) is used by virtual memory operating systems to minimize the overhead of copying the virtual memory
of a process when a process creates a copy of itself. Then the pages in memory that might be modiﬁed by the process or by its
copy are marked as COW. When one process modiﬁes the memory, the operating system’s kernel intercepts the operation and
copies the memory so that changes in one process’s memory are not visible to the other.

434
CHAPTER 11 CLOUD SECURITY
11.13 A TRUSTED HYPERVISOR
After the discussion of Xoar we brieﬂy analyze the design of a trusted hypervisor called Terra [184].
The novel ideas of this design are:
•
A trusted hypervisor should support not only traditional operating systems, by exporting the hard-
ware abstraction for open-box platforms, but also the abstractions for closed-box platforms dis-
cussed in Section 11.7. Note that the VM abstraction for a closed-box platform does not allow the
contents of the system to be either manipulated or inspected by the platform owner.
•
An application should be allowed to build its software stack based on its needs. Applications requir-
ing a very high level of security, e.g., ﬁnancial applications and electronic voting systems should run
under a very thin OS supporting only the functionality required by the application and the ability
to boot. At the other end of the spectrum are applications demanding low assurance, but a rich set
of OS features. Such applications need a commodity operating system. Information assurance (IA)
means to manage the risks related to the use, processing, storage, and transmission of information,
as well as protecting the systems and processes used for those purposes. IA implies protection of
the integrity, availability, authenticity, non-repudiation and conﬁdentiality of the application data.
•
Support additional capabilities to enhance system assurance:
–
Provide trusted paths from a user to an application. We have seen in Section 11.7 that such a path
allows a human user to determine with certainty the identity of the VM it is interacting with and,
at the same time, allows the VM to verify the identity of the human user.
–
Support attestation, the ability of an application running in a closed-box to gain trust from a
remote party, by cryptographically identifying itself.
–
Provide air-tight isolation guarantees for the hypervisor by denying the platform administrator
the root access.
The management VM is selected by the owner of the platform but makes a distinction between the
platform owner and a platform user. The management VM formulates limits for the number of guest
VMs running on the platform, denies access to the guest VM deemed unsuitable to run, grants access
to I/O devices to running VMs and limits their CPU, memory, and disk usage.
Guest VMs expose a raw hardware interface including virtual network interfaces to virtual devices.
The trusted hypervisor runs at the highest privilege level and it is secure even from the actions of the
platform owner; it provides application developers with the semantics of a closed-box platform.
A signiﬁcant challenge to the security of a trusted hypervisor comes from the device drivers used
by different VMs running on the platform. Device drivers are large or very large software components,
especially the drivers for high-end wireless cards and video cards. There is also a large variety of such
drivers, many hastily written to accommodate new hardware features.
Typically, the device drivers are the lowest quality software components found in the kernel of
an operating system thus, they pose the highest security risks. To protect a trusted hypervisor, the
device drivers should not be allowed to access sensitive information and their memory access should be
limited by different hardware protection mechanisms. Malicious I/O devices can use different hardware
capabilities such as DMA to modify the kernel.

11.14 MOBILE DEVICES AND CLOUD SECURITY
435
11.14 MOBILE DEVICES AND CLOUD SECURITY
Mobile devices are an integral part of the cloud ecosystem, mobile applications use cloud services to
access and store data or to carry out a multitude of computational tasks. Security challenges for mobile
devices common to all computer and communication systems include: (i) Conﬁdentiality – ensure that
transmitted and stored data cannot be read by unauthorized parties; (ii) Integrity – detect intentional or
unintentional changes to transmitted and stored data; (iii) Availability – ensure that users can access
cloud resources whenever needed; and (iv) Non-repudiation – the ability to ensure that a party to a
contract cannot deny the sending of a message that they originated.
The technology stack of a mobile device consists of the hardware, the ﬁrmware, the operating sys-
tem, and the applications. The separation between the ﬁrmware and the hardware of a mobile device
is blurred. A baseband processor is used solely for telephony services involving data transfers over
cellular networks operating outside the control of the mobile OS which runs on the application proces-
sor. Security-speciﬁc hardware and ﬁrmware store encryption keys, certiﬁcates, credentials, and other
sensitive information on some mobile devices.
The nature of mobile devices places them at higher exposure to threats than stationary ones. Mobile
devices are designed to easily install applications, to use third-party applications from application
stores, and to communicate with computer clouds via often untrusted cellular and WiFi networks.
Mobile devices interact frequently with other systems to exchange data and often use untrusted content.
Mobile devices often require a short authentication passcode and may not support strong storage
encryption. Location services increase the risk of targeted attacks. Potential attackers are able to deter-
mine user’s location, correlate the location with information from other sources on the individuals the
user associates with, and infer other sensitive information.
Special precautions must then be taken due to exposure to the unique security threats affecting
mobile devices, including:
1.
Mobile malware.
2.
Stolen data due to loss, theft, or disposal.
3.
Unauthorized access.
4.
Electronic eavesdropping.
5.
Electronic tracking.
6.
Access to data by third party applications.
Some of these threats can propagate to the cloud infrastructure a mobile device is connected to. For
example, ﬁles stored on the mobile devices subject to ransomeware and encrypted by a malicious
intruder can migrate to the backup stored on the cloud. The risks posed to the cloud infrastructure by
mobile devices are centered around data leakage and compromise. Such security risks are due to a set
of reasons including:
•
Loss of the mobile device, lock screen protection, enabling smudge attacks and other causes lead-
ing to mobile access control. A smudge attack is a method to discern the password pattern of a
touchscreen device such as a cell phone or tablet computer.
•
Lack of conﬁdentiality protection for data in transit in unsafe or untrusted WiFi or cellular networks.
•
Unmatched ﬁrmware or software including operating system and application software bypassing
the security architecture, e.g., rooted/jailbroken devices.
•
Malicious mobile applications bypassing access control mechanisms.

services to be commoditized, and thus will pave the way for creation of dynamic market infrastruc-
ture for trading based on SLAs. An SLA specifies the details of the service to be provided in terms
of metrics agreed upon by all parties, and incentives and penalties for meeting and violating the
expectations, respectively. The availability of a banking system within the market ensures that
financial transactions pertaining to SLAs between participants are carried out in a secure and
dependable environment.
4.6 CLOUD SECURITY AND TRUST MANAGEMENT
Lacking trust between service providers and cloud users has hindered the universal acceptance of
cloud computing as a service on demand. In the past, trust models have been developed to protect
mainly e-commerce and online shopping provided by eBay and Amazon. For web and cloud ser-
vices, trust and security become even more demanding, because leaving user applications comple-
tely to the cloud providers has faced strong resistance by most PC and server users. Cloud
platforms become worrisome to some users for lack of privacy protection, security assurance, and
copyright protection. Trust is a social problem, not a pure technical issue. However, the social
problem can be solved with a technical approach.
Common sense dictates that technology can enhance trust, justice, reputation, credit, and assurance
in Internet applications. As a virtual environment, the cloud poses new security threats that are more
difficult to contain than traditional client and server configurations. To solve these trust problems, a
new data-protection model is presented in this section. In many cases, one can extend the trust models
for P2P networks and grid systems to protect clouds and data centers.
4.6.1 Cloud Security Defense Strategies
A healthy cloud ecosystem is desired to free users from abuses, violence, cheating, hacking, viruses,
rumors, pornography, spam, and privacy and copyright violations. The security demands of three
cloud service models, IaaS, PaaS, and SaaS, are described in this section. These security models are
based on various SLAs between providers and users.
4.6.1.1 Basic Cloud Security
Three basic cloud security enforcements are expected. First, facility security in data centers
demands on-site security year round. Biometric readers, CCTV (close-circuit TV), motion detection,
and man traps are often deployed. Also, network security demands fault-tolerant external firewalls,
intrusion detection systems (IDSes), and third-party vulnerability assessment. Finally, platform
security demands SSL and data decryption, strict password policies, and system trust certification.
Figure 4.31 shows the mapping of cloud models, where special security measures are deployed at
various cloud operating levels.
Servers in the cloud can be physical machines or VMs. User interfaces are applied to request
services. The provisioning tool carves out the systems from the cloud to satisfy the requested ser-
vice. A security-aware cloud architecture demands security enforcement. Malware-based attacks
such as network worms, viruses, and DDoS attacks exploit system vulnerabilities. These attacks
compromise system functionality or provide intruders unauthorized access to critical information.
4.6 Cloud Security and Trust Management
249

Thus, security defenses are needed to protect all cluster servers and data centers. Here are some
cloud components that demand special security protection:
•
Protection of servers from malicious software attacks such as worms, viruses, and malware
•
Protection of hypervisors or VM monitors from software-based attacks and vulnerabilities
•
Protection of VMs and monitors from service disruption and DoS attacks
Cloud service models
Applications
Applications
Security, privacy, and copyright protection measures
needed at various cloud service levels
Binary analysis, scanners, WebApp firewalls,
transactional security, copyright protection
Data loss protection, common log file,
database activity, monitoring, encryption,
data coloring (watermarking)
Government risk management and compliance,
identity and access management, virtual
machines (VMs), patch management
Network IDS/IPS, firewalls, data processing
information, Anti-DDoS, QoS, DNSSEC
Hardware and software RoT and APIs,
trust-overlay and reputation systems
IDS/IPS, host-based firewalls, integrity and
fire/log management, encryption, masking
Acronyms:
IPS:
RoT:
DDoS:
DNSSEC:
QoS:
Intrusion-prevention system
Root of trust
Distributed denial of service
Domain Name System Security Extensions
Quality of service
Data/information
Management
Networking
Trusted
computing
Compute and
storage
APIs
Data
Content Metadata
Integration OS and
middleware
APIs
Connectivity and
delivery
Virtualization
Hardware
IaaS
PaaS
SaaS
(a) Cloud service models
(b) Security, privacy, and copyright protection measures
FIGURE 4.31
Cloud service models on the left (a) and corresponding security measures on the right (b); the IaaS is at the
innermost level, PaaS is at the middle level, and SaaS is at the outermost level, including all hardware,
software, datasets, and networking resources.
(Courtesy of Hwang and Li [36] )
250
CHAPTER 4 Cloud Platform Architecture over Virtualized Data Centers

•
Protection of data and information from theft, corruption, and natural disasters
•
Providing authenticated and authorized access to critical data and services
4.6.1.2 Security Challenges in VMs
As we discussed earlier in this chapter, traditional network attacks include buffer overflows, DoS
attacks, spyware, malware, rootkits, Trojan horses, and worms. In a cloud environment, newer attacks
may result from hypervisor malware, guest hopping and hijacking, or VM rootkits. Another type of
attack is the man-in-the-middle attack for VM migrations. In general, passive attacks steal sensitive data
or passwords. Active attacks may manipulate kernel data structures which will cause major damage to
cloud servers. An IDS can be a NIDS or a HIDS. Program shepherding can be applied to control and
verify code execution. Other defense technologies include using the RIO dynamic optimization infra-
structure, or VMware’s vSafe and vShield tools, security compliance for hypervisors, and Intel vPro
technology. Others apply a hardened OS environment or use isolated execution and sandboxing.
4.6.1.3 Cloud Defense Methods
Virtualization enhances cloud security. But VMs add an additional layer of software that could
become a single point of failure. With virtualization, a single physical machine can be divided or
partitioned into multiple VMs (e.g., server consolidation). This provides each VM with better secur-
ity isolation and each partition is protected from DoS attacks by other partitions. Security attacks in
one VM are isolated and contained from affecting the other VMs. Table 4.9 lists eight protection
schemes to secure public clouds and data centers. VM failures do not propagate to other VMs. The
Table 4.9 Physical and Cyber Security Protection at Cloud/Data Centers
Protection
Schemes
Brief Description and Deployment Suggestions
Secure data centers
and computer
buildings
Choose hazard-free location, enforce building safety. Avoid windows, keep buffer
zone around the site, bomb detection, camera surveillance, earthquake-proof, etc.
Use redundant utilities
at multiple sites
Multiple power and supplies, alternate network connections, multiple databases at
separate sites, data consistency, data watermarking, user authentication, etc.
Trust delegation and
negotiation
Cross certificates to delegate trust across PKI domains for various data centers,
trust negotiation among certificate authorities (CAs) to resolve policy conflicts
Worm containment
and DDoS defense
Internet worm containment and distributed defense against DDoS attacks to
secure all data centers and cloud platforms
Reputation system for
data centers
Reputation system could be built with P2P technology; one can build a hierarchy
of reputation systems from data centers to distributed file systems
Fine-grained file
access control
Fine-grained access control at the file or object level; this adds to security
protection beyond firewalls and IDSes
Copyright protection
and piracy prevention
Piracy prevention achieved with peer collusion prevention, filtering of poisoned
content, nondestructive read, alteration detection, etc.
Privacy protection
Uses double authentication, biometric identification, intrusion detection and disaster
recovery, privacy enforcement by data watermarking, data classification, etc.
4.6 Cloud Security and Trust Management
251

hypervisor provides visibility of the guest OS, with complete guest isolation. Fault containment and
failure isolation of VMs provide a more secure and robust environment. Malicious intrusions may
destroy valuable hosts, networks, and storage resources. Internet anomalies found in routers, gate-
ways, and distributed hosts may stop cloud services. Trust negotiation is often done at the SLA
level. Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) services could be augmented with data-center reputation sys-
tems. Worm and DDoS attacks must be contained. It is harder to establish security in the cloud
because all data and software are shared by default.
4.6.1.4 Defense with Virtualization
The VM is decoupled from the physical hardware. The entire VM can be represented as a software
component and can be regarded as binary or digital data. The VM can be saved, cloned, encrypted,
moved, or restored with ease. VMs enable HA and faster disaster recovery. Live migration of VMs
was suggested by many researchers [36] for building distributed intrusion detection systems
(DIDSes). Multiple IDS VMs can be deployed at various resource sites including data centers.
DIDS design demands trust negation among PKI domains. Security policy conflicts must be
resolved at design time and updated periodically.
4.6.1.5 Privacy and Copyright Protection
The user gets a predictable configuration before actual system integration. Yahoo!’s Pipes is a good
example of a lightweight cloud platform. With shared files and data sets, privacy, security, and copy-
right data could be compromised in a cloud computing environment. Users desire to work in a software
environment that provides many useful tools to build cloud applications over large data sets. Google’s
platform essentially applies in-house software to protect resources. The Amazon EC2 applies HMEC
and X.509 certificates in securing resources. It is necessary to protect browser-initiated application
software in the cloud environment. Here are several security features desired in a secure cloud:
•
Dynamic web services with full support from secure web technologies
•
Established trust between users and providers through SLAs and reputation systems
•
Effective user identity management and data-access management
•
Single sign-on and single sign-off to reduce security enforcement overhead
•
Auditing and copyright compliance through proactive enforcement
•
Shifting of control of data operations from the client environment to cloud providers
•
Protection of sensitive and regulated information in a shared environment
Example 4.7 Cloud Security Safeguarded by Gateway and Firewalls
Figure 4.32 shows a security defense system for a typical private cloud environment. The gateway is fully
secured to protect access to commercial clouds that are wide open to the general public. The firewall provides
an external shield. The gateway secures the application server, message queue, database, web service client,
and browser with HTTP, JMS, SQL, XML, and SSL security protocols, etc. The defense scheme is needed to
protect user data from server attacks. A user’s private data must not be leaked to other users without
permission.
252
CHAPTER 4 Cloud Platform Architecture over Virtualized Data Centers

4.6.2 Distributed Intrusion/Anomaly Detection
Data security is the weakest link in all cloud models. We need new cloud security standards to
apply common API tools to cope with the data lock-in problem and network attacks or abuses.
The IaaS model represented by Amazon is most sensitive to external attacks. Role-based interface
tools alleviate the complexity of the provisioning system. For example, IBM’s Blue Cloud provi-
sions through a role-based web portal. A SaaS bureau may order secretarial services from a com-
mon cloud platform. Many IT companies are now offering cloud services with no guaranteed
security.
Security threats may be aimed at VMs, guest OSes, and software running on top of the cloud.
IDSes attempt to stop these attacks before they take effect. Both signature matching and anomaly
detection can be implemented on VMs dedicated to building IDSes. Signature-matching IDS
Cloud computing
HTTP
XML
JMS
Vordel XML
gateway
Vordel
reporter
SQL
SSL
Web services client
Browser
Database
Message queue
Application server
Amazon EC2
Force.com
FIGURE 4.32
The typical security structure coordinated by a secured gateway plus external firewalls to safeguard the
access of public or private clouds.
(Courtesy of Vordel Company )
4.6 Cloud Security and Trust Management
253

technology is more mature, but require frequent updates of the signature databases. Network anom-
aly detection reveals abnormal traffic patterns, such as unauthorized episodes of TCP connection
sequences, against normal traffic patterns. Distributed IDSes are needed to combat both types of
intrusions.
4.6.2.1 Distributed Defense against DDoS Flooding Attacks
A DDoS defense system must be designed to cover multiple network domains spanned by a given
cloud platform. These network domains cover the edge networks where cloud resources are con-
nected. DDoS attacks come with widespread worms. The flooding traffic is large enough to crash the
victim server by buffer overflow, disk exhaustion, or connection saturation. Figure 4.33(a) shows a
flooding attack pattern. Here, the hidden attacker launched the attack from many zombies toward a
victim server at the bottom router R0.
The flooding traffic flows essentially with a tree pattern shown in Figure 4.33(b). Successive
attack-transit routers along the tree reveal the abnormal surge in traffic. This DDoS defense system
is based on change-point detection by all routers. Based on the anomaly pattern detected in covered
network domains, the scheme detects a DDoS attack before the victim is overwhelmed. The
(a) Traffic flow pattern of a DDoS attack
(b) The attack traffic flow tree over 10 routers
R0
R9
R7
R8
R1
R2
R3
R5
R4
R6
Victim
DDoS attacking zombies
Malicious attacking flows
R3
R5
R4
R2
R1
R0
R8
R6
R7
R9
FIGURE 4.33
DDoS attacks and defense by change-point detection at all routers on the flooding tree.
(Courtesy of Chen, Hwang, and Ku [15] )
254
CHAPTER 4 Cloud Platform Architecture over Virtualized Data Centers

detection scheme is suitable for protecting cloud core networks. The provider-level cooperation
eliminates the need for intervention by edge networks.
Example 4.8 Man-in-the-Middle Attacks
Figure 4.34 shows VM migration from host machine VMM A to host machine VMM B, via a security vulner-
able network. In a man-in-the-middle attack, the attacker can view the VM contents being migrated, steal
sensitive data, or even modify the VM-specific contents including the OS and application states. An
attacker posing this attack can launch an active attack to insert a VM-based rootkit into the migrating VM,
which can subvert the entire operation of the migration process without the knowledge of the guest OS
and embedded application.
4.6.3 Data and Software Protection Techniques
In this section, we will introduce a data coloring technique to preserve data integrity and user
privacy. Then we will discuss a watermarking scheme to protect software files from being widely
distributed in a cloud environment.
4.6.3.1 Data Integrity and Privacy Protection
Users desire a software environment that provides many useful tools to build cloud applications over
large data sets. In addition to application software for MapReduce, BigTable, EC2, 3S, Hadoop,
AWS, GAE, and WebSphere2, users need some security and privacy protection software for using
the cloud. Such software should offer the following features:
•
Special APIs for authenticating users and sending e-mail using commercial accounts
•
Fine-grained access control to protect data integrity and deter intruders or hackers
•
Shared data sets protected from malicious alteration, deletion, or copyright violation
Host A
migrates VM
to Host B
Network
Can modify arbitrary VM
OS/application state
Man-in-the-middle attack
Unencrypted
VM instance
Host VMM B
VM instance
Host VMM A
FIGURE 4.34
A VM migrating from host A to host B through a vulnerable network threatened by a man-in-the-middle attack
to modify the VM template and OS state.
4.6 Cloud Security and Trust Management
255

•
Ability to secure the ISP or cloud service provider from invading users’ privacy
•
Personal firewalls at user ends to keep shared data sets from Java, JavaScript, and ActiveX
applets
•
A privacy policy consistent with the cloud service provider’s policy, to protect against identity
theft, spyware, and web bugs
•
VPN channels between resource sites to secure transmission of critical data objects
4.6.3.2 Data Coloring and Cloud Watermarking
With shared files and data sets, privacy, security, and copyright information could be compromised
in a cloud computing environment. Users desire to work in a trusted software environment that pro-
vides useful tools to build cloud applications over protected data sets. In the past, watermarking
was mainly used for digital copyright management. As shown in Figure 4.35, the system generates
special colors for each data object. Data coloring means labeling each data object by a unique
color. Differently colored data objects are thus distinguishable.
The user identification is also colored to be matched with the data colors. This color matching
process can be applied to implement different trust management events. Cloud storage provides
a process for the generation, embedding, and extraction of the watermarks in colored objects.
Interested readers may refer to the articles by Hwang and Li [36] for details on the data coloring
and matching process. In general, data protection was done by encryption or decryption which is
Forward
color
generator
Cloud drops (colors)
Data
coloring
Cloud
drops
extracting
Colored
Colored
Virtual
storage
Backward
color
generator
Color
matching
Confirmation
Service
provider
Negotiation
Data
owner
Ex
En
He
Ex’
En’
He’
User data
FIGURE 4.35
Data coloring with cloud watermarking for trust management at various security clearance levels in data
centers.
(Courtesy of Hwang and Li [36] )
256
CHAPTER 4 Cloud Platform Architecture over Virtualized Data Centers

computationally expensive. The data coloring takes a minimal number of calculations to color or
decolor the data objects. Cryptography and watermarking or coloring can be used jointly in a cloud
environment.
4.6.3.3 Data Lock-in Problem and Proactive Solutions
Cloud computing moves both the computation and the data to the server clusters maintained by
cloud service providers. Once the data is moved into the cloud, users cannot easily extract their
data and programs from cloud servers to run on another platform. This leads to a data lock-in pro-
blem. This has hindered the use of cloud computing. Data lock-in is attributed to two causes: lack
of interoperability, whereby each cloud vendor has its proprietary API that limits users to extract
data once submitted; and lack of application compatibility, in that most computing clouds expect
users to write new applications from scratch, when they switch cloud platforms.
One possible solution to data lock-in is the use of standardized cloud APIs. This requires building
standardized virtual platforms that adhere to OVF, a platform-independent, efficient, extensible, and
open format for VMs. This will enable efficient, secure software distribution, facilitating the mobility
of VMs. Using OVF one can move data from one application to another. This will enhance QoS, and
thus enable cross-cloud applications, allowing workload migration among data centers to user-specific
storage. By deploying applications, users can access and intermix applications across different cloud
services.
4.6.4 Reputation-Guided Protection of Data Centers
Trust is a personal opinion, which is very subjective and often biased. Trust can be transitive but
not necessarily symmetric between two parties. Reputation is a public opinion, which is more objec-
tive and often relies on a large opinion aggregation process to evaluate. Reputation may change or
decay over time. Recent reputation should be given more preference than past reputation. In this
section, we review the reputation systems for protecting data centers or cloud user communities.
4.6.4.1 Reputation System Design Options
Figure 4.36 provides an overview of reputation system design options. Public opinion on the char-
acter or standing (such as honest behavior or reliability) of an entity could be the reputation of a
person, an agent, a product, or a service. It represents a collective evaluation by a group of people/
agents and resource owners. Many reputation systems have been proposed in the past mainly for
P2P, multiagent, or e-commerce systems.
To address reputation systems for cloud services, a systematic approach is based on the design
criteria and administration of the reputation systems. Figure 4.36 shows a two-tier classification of
existing reputation systems that have been proposed in recent years. Most of them were designed
for P2P or social networks. These reputation systems can be converted for protecting cloud comput-
ing applications. In general, the reputation systems are classified as centralized or distributed
depending on how they are implemented. In a centralized system, a single central authority is
responsible for managing the reputation system, while the distributed model involves multiple con-
trol centers working collectively. Reputation-based trust management and techniques for securing
P2P and social networks could be merged to defend data centers and cloud platforms against attacks
from the open network.
4.6 Cloud Security and Trust Management
257

A centralized reputation system is easier to implement, but demands more powerful and reliable
server resources; a distributed reputation system is much more complex to build. Distributed systems
are more scalable and reliable in terms of handling failures. At the second tier, reputation systems are
further classified by the scope of reputation evaluation. User-oriented reputation systems focus on
individual users or agents. Most P2P reputation systems belong to this category. In data centers, repu-
tation is modeled for the resource site as a whole. This reputation applies to products or services
offered by the cloud. Commercial reputation systems have been built by eBay, Google, and Amazon
in connection with the services they provide. These are centralized reputation systems.
Distributed reputation systems are mostly developed by academic research communities. Aberer and
Despotovic have proposed a model to manage trust in P2P systems. The Eigentrust reputation system
was developed at Stanford University using a trust matrix approach. The PeerTrust system was devel-
oped at Georgia Institute of Technology for supporting e-commerce applications. The PowerTrust sys-
tem was developed at the University of Southern California based on Power law characteristics of
Internet traffic for P2P applications. Vu, et al. proposed a QoS-based ranking system for P2P
transactions.
4.6.4.2 Reputation Systems for Clouds
Redesigning the aforementioned reputation systems for protecting data centers offers new opportu-
nities for expanded applications beyond P2P networks. Data consistency is checked across multiple
databases. Copyright protection secures wide-area content distributions. To separate user data from
specific SaaS programs, providers take the most responsibility in maintaining data integrity and con-
sistency. Users can switch among different services using their own data. Only the users have the
keys to access the requested data.
The data objects must be uniquely named to ensure global consistency. To ensure data consis-
tency, unauthorized updates of data objects by other cloud users are prohibited. The reputation system
Centralized
Distributed
User-oriented
Data center-based
User-oriented
eBay
Social network
Google
Data center-based
Amazon
PeerTrust [69]
EigenTrust [33]
Vu, et al. [64]
PowerTrust [72]
Reputation systems
Aberer and
despotovic [1]
FIGURE 4.36
Design options of reputation systems for social networks and cloud platforms.
258
CHAPTER 4 Cloud Platform Architecture over Virtualized Data Centers

can be implemented with a trust overlay network. A hierarchy of P2P reputation systems is suggested
to protect cloud resources at the site level and data objects at the file level. This demands both
coarse-grained and fine-grained access control of shared resources. These reputation systems keep
track of security breaches at all levels.
The reputation system must be designed to benefit both cloud users and data centers. Data objects
used in cloud computing reside in multiple data centers over a SAN. In the past, most reputation
systems were designed for P2P social networking or for online shopping services. These reputation
systems can be converted to protect cloud platform resources or user applications in the cloud. A cen-
tralized reputation system is easier to implement, but demands more powerful and reliable server
resources. Distributed reputation systems are more scalable and reliable in terms of handling failures.
The five security mechanisms presented earlier can be greatly assisted by using a reputation system
specifically designed for data centers.
However, it is possible to add social tools such as reputation systems to support safe cloning of
VMs. Snapshot control is based on the defined RPO. Users demand new security mechanisms to
protect the cloud. For example, one can apply secured information logging, migrate over secured
virtual LANs, and apply ECC-based encryption for secure migration. Sandboxes provide a safe
execution platform for running programs. Further, sandboxes can provide a tightly controlled set of
resources for guest operating systems, which allows a security test bed to test the application code
from third-party vendors.
4.6.4.3 Trust Overlay Networks
Reputation represents a collective evaluation by users and resource owners. Many reputation
systems have been proposed in the past for P2P, multiagent, or e-commerce systems. To sup-
port trusted cloud services, Hwang and Li [36] have suggested building a trust overlay network
to model trust relationships among data-center modules. This trust overlay could be structured
with a distributed hash table (DHT) to achieve fast aggregation of global reputations from a
large number of local reputation scores. This trust overlay design was first introduced in [12].
Here, the designer needs to have two layers for fast reputation aggregation, updating, and disse-
mination to all users. Figure 4.37 shows construction of the two layers of the trust overlay
network.
At the bottom layer is the trust overlay for distributed trust negotiation and reputation aggrega-
tion over multiple resource sites. This layer handles user/server authentication, access authorization,
trust delegation, and data integrity control. At the top layer is an overlay for fast virus/worm signa-
ture generation and dissemination and for piracy detection. This overlay facilitates worm contain-
ment and IDSes against viruses, worms, and DDoS attacks. The content poisoning technique [6] is
reputation-based. This protection scheme can stop copyright violations in a cloud environment over
multiple data centers.
The reputation system enables trusted interactions between cloud users and data-center owners.
Privacy is enforced by matching colored user identifications with the colored data objects. The use
of content poisoning was suggested to protect copyright of digital content [46]. The security-aware
cloud architecture (see Figure 4.14) is specially tailored to protect virtualized cloud infrastructure.
The trust of provided cloud platforms comes from not only SLAs, but also from effective enforce-
ment of security policies and deployment of countermeasures to defend against network attacks. By
varying security control standards, one can cope with the dynamic variation of cloud operating
4.6 Cloud Security and Trust Management
259

conditions. The design is aimed at a trusted cloud environment to ensure high-quality services,
including security.
The cloud security trend is to apply virtualization support for security enforcement in data centers.
Both reputation systems and data watermarking mechanisms can protect data-center access at the
coarse-grained level and to limit data access at the fine-grained file level. In the long run, a new Security
as a Service is desired. This “SaaS” is crucial to the universal acceptance of web-scale cloud computing
in personal, business, community, and government applications. Internet clouds are certainly in line
with IT globalization and efficient computer outsourcing. However, interoperability among different
clouds relies on a common operational standard by building a healthy cloud ecosystem.
Alert vulnerable hosts
Terminate DDoS
attacks
Distributed reputation aggregation and probing of piracy colluders
Access authorization
Trust delegation
Trust integration/negotiation over distributed cloud resource sites
Data integrity control
User/server authentication
Defense against
piracy or network
attacks
Trust overlay networks over
cloud resources sites
and data centers
Penalize pirates
Misuse
detection
Anomaly
detection
Hybrid intrusion detection
Distributed defence against worms, DDoS attacks, and copyright violations
DDoS defense and piracy prevention
Worm containment
Reputation aggregation
and integration
FIGURE 4.37
DHT-based trust overlay networks built over cloud resources provisioned from multiple data centers for trust
management and distributed security enforcement.
(Courtesy of Hwang and Li [36] )
260
CHAPTER 4 Cloud Platform Architecture over Virtualized Data Centers
