C h a p t e r
ARM Embedded
Systems 1
The ARM processor core is a key component of many successful 32-bit embedded systems.
You probably own one yourself and may not even realize it! ARM cores are widely used in
mobile phones, handheld organizers, and a multitude of other everyday portable consumer
devices.
ARM’s designers have come a long way from the ﬁrst ARM1 prototype in 1985. Over
one billion ARM processors had been shipped worldwide by the end of 2001. The ARM
company bases their success on a simple and powerful original design, which continues
to improve today through constant technical innovation. In fact, the ARM core is not
a single core, but a whole family of designs sharing similar design principles and a common
instruction set.
For example, one of ARM’s most successful cores is the ARM7TDMI. It provides up to
120 Dhrystone MIPS1 and is known for its high code density and low power consumption,
making it ideal for mobile embedded devices.
In this ﬁrst chapter we discuss how the RISC (reduced instruction set computer) design
philosophywasadaptedbyARMtocreateaﬂexibleembeddedprocessor. Wethenintroduce
an example embedded device and discuss the typical hardware and software technologies
that surround an ARM processor.
1. Dhrystone MIPS version 2.1 is a small benchmarking program.
3

4
Chapter 1 ARM Embedded Systems
1.1 The RISC design philosophy
The ARM core uses a RISC architecture. RISC is a design philosophy aimed at delivering
simple but powerful instructions that execute within a single cycle at a high clock speed.
The RISC philosophy concentrates on reducing the complexity of instructions performed
by the hardware because it is easier to provide greater ﬂexibility and intelligence in software
rather than hardware. As a result, a RISC design places greater demands on the compiler.
In contrast, the traditional complex instruction set computer (CISC) relies more on the
hardware for instruction functionality, and consequently the CISC instructions are more
complicated. Figure 1.1 illustrates these major differences.
The RISC philosophy is implemented with four major design rules:
1. Instructions—RISC processors have a reduced number of instruction classes. These
classes provide simple operations that can each execute in a single cycle. The compiler
or programmer synthesizes complicated operations (for example, a divide operation)
by combining several simple instructions. Each instruction is a ﬁxed length to allow
the pipeline to fetch future instructions before decoding the current instruction. In
contrast, in CISC processors the instructions are often of variable size and take many
cycles to execute.
2. Pipelines—The processing of instructions is broken down into smaller units that can be
executed in parallel by pipelines. Ideally the pipeline advances by one step on each cycle
for maximum throughput. Instructions can be decoded in one pipeline stage. There is
no need for an instruction to be executed by a miniprogram called microcode as on
CISC processors.
3. Registers—RISC machines have a large general-purpose register set. Any register can
contain either data or an address. Registers act as the fast local memory store for all data
CISC
RISC
Compiler
Compiler
Processor
Processor
Code
Generation
Greater
Complexity
Greater
Complexity
Code
Generation
Figure 1.1
CISC vs. RISC. CISC emphasizes hardware complexity. RISC emphasizes compiler
complexity.

1.2 The ARM Design Philosophy
5
processing operations. In contrast, CISC processors have dedicated registers for speciﬁc
purposes.
4. Load-store architecture—The processor operates on data held in registers. Separate load
and store instructions transfer data between the register bank and external memory.
Memory accesses are costly, so separating memory accesses from data processing pro-
vides an advantage because you can use data items held in the register bank multiple
times without needing multiple memory accesses. In contrast, with a CISC design the
data processing operations can act on memory directly.
These design rules allow a RISC processor to be simpler, and thus the core can operate
at higher clock frequencies. In contrast, traditional CISC processors are more complex
and operate at lower clock frequencies. Over the course of two decades, however, the
distinction between RISC and CISC has blurred as CISC processors have implemented
more RISC concepts.
1.2 The ARM Design Philosophy
There are a number of physical features that have driven the ARM processor design. First,
portable embedded systems require some form of battery power. The ARM processor has
been speciﬁcally designed to be small to reduce power consumption and extend battery
operation—essential for applications such as mobile phones and personal digital assistants
(PDAs).
High code density is another major requirement since embedded systems have lim-
ited memory due to cost and/or physical size restrictions. High code density is useful for
applications that have limited on-board memory, such as mobile phones and mass storage
devices.
In addition, embedded systems are price sensitive and use slow and low-cost memory
devices. For high-volume applications like digital cameras, every cent has to be accounted
for in the design. The ability to use low-cost memory devices produces substantial savings.
Anotherimportantrequirementistoreducetheareaofthedietakenupbytheembedded
processor. For a single-chip solution, the smaller the area used by the embedded processor,
the more available space for specialized peripherals. This in turn reduces the cost of the
design and manufacturing since fewer discrete chips are required for the end product.
ARM has incorporated hardware debug technology within the processor so that software
engineers can view what is happening while the processor is executing code. With greater
visibility, software engineers can resolve issues faster, which has a direct effect on the time
to market and reduces overall development costs.
The ARM core is not a pure RISC architecture because of the constraints of its primary
application—the embedded system. In some sense, the strength of the ARM core is that
it does not take the RISC concept too far. In today’s systems the key is not raw processor
speed but total effective system performance and power consumption.

6
Chapter 1 ARM Embedded Systems
1.2.1
Instruction Set for Embedded Systems
The ARM instruction set differs from the pure RISC deﬁnition in several ways that make
the ARM instruction set suitable for embedded applications:
■
Variable cycle execution for certain instructions—Not every ARM instruction executes
in a single cycle. For example, load-store-multiple instructions vary in the number
of execution cycles depending upon the number of registers being transferred. The
transfer can occur on sequential memory addresses, which increases performance since
sequential memory accesses are often faster than random accesses. Code density is also
improved since multiple register transfers are common operations at the start and end
of functions.
■
Inline barrel shifter leading to more complex instructions—The inline barrel shifter is
a hardware component that preprocesses one of the input registers before it is used
by an instruction. This expands the capability of many instructions to improve core
performance and code density. We explain this feature in more detail in Chapters 2, 3,
and 4.
■
Thumb 16-bit instruction set—ARM enhanced the processor core by adding a second
16-bit instruction set called Thumb that permits the ARM core to execute either
16- or 32-bit instructions. The 16-bit instructions improve code density by about
30% over 32-bit ﬁxed-length instructions.
■
Conditional execution—An instruction is only executed when a speciﬁc condition has
been satisﬁed. This feature improves performance and code density by reducing branch
instructions.
■
Enhanced instructions—The enhanced digital signal processor (DSP) instructions were
added to the standard ARM instruction set to support fast 16×16-bit multiplier oper-
ations and saturation. These instructions allow a faster-performing ARM processor in
some cases to replace the traditional combinations of a processor plus a DSP.
These additional features have made the ARM processor one of the most commonly
used 32-bit embedded processor cores. Many of the top semiconductor companies around
the world produce products based around the ARM processor.
1.3 Embedded System Hardware
Embedded systems can control many different devices, from small sensors found on
a production line, to the real-time control systems used on a NASA space probe. All
these devices use a combination of software and hardware components. Each component
is chosen for efﬁciency and, if applicable, is designed for future extension and expansion.

1.3 Embedded System Hardware
7
ARM
processor
AHB arbiter
Interrupt controller
AHB-APB bridge
Real-time clock
Serial UARTs
Memory controller
AHB-external bridge
Ethernet
Counter/timers
ROM
SRAM
FLASHROM
DRAM
External bus
Ethernet
physical
driver
Console
ARM
Controllers
Peripherals
Bus
Figure 1.2
An example of an ARM-based embedded device, a microcontroller.
Figure 1.2 shows a typical embedded device based on an ARM core. Each box represents
a feature or function. The lines connecting the boxes are the buses carrying data. We can
separate the device into four main hardware components:
■
The ARM processor controls the embedded device. Different versions of the ARM pro-
cessor are available to suit the desired operating characteristics. An ARM processor
comprises a core (the execution engine that processes instructions and manipulates
data) plus the surrounding components that interface it with a bus. These components
can include memory management and caches.
■
Controllers coordinate important functional blocks of the system. Two commonly
found controllers are interrupt and memory controllers.
■
The peripherals provide all the input-output capability external to the chip and are
responsible for the uniqueness of the embedded device.
■
A bus is used to communicate between different parts of the device.

8
Chapter 1 ARM Embedded Systems
1.3.1
ARM Bus Technology
Embeddedsystemsusedifferentbustechnologiesthanthosedesignedforx86PCs. Themost
common PC bus technology, the Peripheral Component Interconnect (PCI) bus, connects
such devices as video cards and hard disk controllers to the x86 processor bus. This type
of technology is external or off-chip (i.e., the bus is designed to connect mechanically and
electrically to devices external to the chip) and is built into the motherboard of a PC.
In contrast, embedded devices use an on-chip bus that is internal to the chip and that
allows different peripheral devices to be interconnected with an ARM core.
There are two different classes of devices attached to the bus. The ARM processor core is
a bus master—a logical device capable of initiating a data transfer with another device across
the same bus. Peripherals tend to be bus slaves—logical devices capable only of responding
to a transfer request from a bus master device.
A bus has two architecture levels. The ﬁrst is a physical level that covers the electrical
characteristics and bus width (16, 32, or 64 bits). The second level deals with protocol—the
logical rules that govern the communication between the processor and a peripheral.
ARM is primarily a design company. It seldom implements the electrical characteristics
of the bus, but it routinely speciﬁes the bus protocol.
1.3.2
AMBA Bus Protocol
The Advanced Microcontroller Bus Architecture (AMBA) was introduced in 1996 and has
been widely adopted as the on-chip bus architecture used for ARM processors. The ﬁrst
AMBA buses introduced were the ARM System Bus (ASB) and the ARM Peripheral Bus
(APB). Later ARM introduced another bus design, called the ARM High Performance Bus
(AHB). Using AMBA, peripheral designers can reuse the same design on multiple projects.
Because there are a large number of peripherals developed with an AMBA interface, hard-
ware designers have a wide choice of tested and proven peripherals for use in a device.
A peripheral can simply be bolted onto the on-chip bus without having to redesign an inter-
face for each different processor architecture. This plug-and-play interface for hardware
developers improves availability and time to market.
AHB provides higher data throughput than ASB because it is based on a centralized
multiplexed bus scheme rather than the ASB bidirectional bus design. This change allows
the AHB bus to run at higher clock speeds and to be the ﬁrst ARM bus to support widths
of 64 and 128 bits. ARM has introduced two variations on the AHB bus: Multi-layer AHB
and AHB-Lite. In contrast to the original AHB, which allows a single bus master to be
active on the bus at any time, the Multi-layer AHB bus allows multiple active bus masters.
AHB-Lite is a subset of the AHB bus and it is limited to a single bus master. This bus was
developed for designs that do not require the full features of the standard AHB bus.
AHB and Multi-layer AHB support the same protocol for master and slave but have
different interconnects. The new interconnects in Multi-layer AHB are good for systems
with multiple processors. They permit operations to occur in parallel and allow for higher
throughput rates.

1.3 Embedded System Hardware
9
The example device shown in Figure 1.2 has three buses: an AHB bus for the high-
performance peripherals, an APB bus for the slower peripherals, and a third bus for external
peripherals, proprietary to this device. This external bus requires a specialized bridge to
connect with the AHB bus.
1.3.3
Memory
An embedded system has to have some form of memory to store and execute code. You
have to compare price, performance, and power consumption when deciding upon speciﬁc
memory characteristics, such as hierarchy, width, and type. If memory has to run twice as
fast to maintain a desired bandwidth, then the memory power requirement may be higher.
1.3.3.1
Hierarchy
All computer systems have memory arranged in some form of hierarchy. Figure 1.2 shows
a device that supports external off-chip memory. Internal to the processor there is an option
of a cache (not shown in Figure 1.2) to improve memory performance.
Figure 1.3 shows the memory trade-offs: the fastest memory cache is physically located
nearer the ARM processor core and the slowest secondary memory is set further away.
Generally the closer memory is to the processor core, the more it costs and the smaller its
capacity.
The cache is placed between main memory and the core. It is used to speed up data
transfer between the processor and main memory. A cache provides an overall increase in
performance but with a loss of predictable execution time. Although the cache increases the
Performance/costs
1 MB
Cache
Main
memory
Secondary
storage
1 GB
Memory Size
Figure 1.3
Storage trade-offs.

10
Chapter 1 ARM Embedded Systems
general performance of the system, it does not help real-time system response. Note that
many small embedded systems do not require the performance beneﬁts of a cache.
The main memory is large—around 256 KB to 256 MB (or even greater), depending on
the application—and is generally stored in separate chips. Load and store instructions access
the main memory unless the values have been stored in the cache for fast access. Secondary
storage is the largest and slowest form of memory. Hard disk drives and CD-ROM drives
are examples of secondary storage. These days secondary storage may vary from 600 MB
to 60 GB.
1.3.3.2
Width
The memory width is the number of bits the memory returns on each access—typically
8, 16, 32, or 64 bits. The memory width has a direct effect on the overall performance and
cost ratio.
If you have an uncached system using 32-bit ARM instructions and 16-bit-wide memory
chips, then the processor will have to make two memory fetches per instruction. Each fetch
requires two 16-bit loads. This obviously has the effect of reducing system performance,
but the beneﬁt is that 16-bit memory is less expensive.
In contrast, if the core executes 16-bit Thumb instructions, it will achieve better
performance with a 16-bit memory. The higher performance is a result of the core making
only a single fetch to memory to load an instruction. Hence, using Thumb instructions
with 16-bit-wide memory devices provides both improved performance and reduced cost.
Table 1.1 summarizes theoretical cycle times on an ARM processor using different
memory width devices.
1.3.3.3
Types
There are many different types of memory. In this section we describe some of the more
popular memory devices found in ARM-based embedded systems.
Read-only memory (ROM) is the least ﬂexible of all memory types because it contains an
image that is permanently set at production time and cannot be reprogrammed. ROMs are
used in high-volume devices that require no updates or corrections. Many devices also use
a ROM to hold boot code.
Table 1.1
Fetching instructions from memory.
Instruction size
8-bit memory
16-bit memory
32-bit memory
ARM 32-bit
4 cycles
2 cycles
1 cycle
Thumb 16-bit
2 cycles
1 cycle
1 cycle

1.3 Embedded System Hardware
11
Flash ROM can be written to as well as read, but it is slow to write so you shouldn’t use
it for holding dynamic data. Its main use is for holding the device ﬁrmware or storing long-
term data that needs to be preserved after power is off. The erasing and writing of ﬂash ROM
are completely software controlled with no additional hardware circuity required, which
reduces the manufacturing costs. Flash ROM has become the most popular of the read-only
memory types and is currently being used as an alternative for mass or secondary storage.
Dynamicrandomaccessmemory(DRAM)isthemostcommonlyusedRAMfordevices.
It has the lowest cost per megabyte compared with other types of RAM. DRAM is dynamic—
it needs to have its storage cells refreshed and given a new electronic charge every few
milliseconds, so you need to set up a DRAM controller before using the memory.
Static random access memory (SRAM) is faster than the more traditional DRAM, but
requires more silicon area. SRAM is static—the RAM does not require refreshing. The
access time for SRAM is considerably shorter than the equivalent DRAM because SRAM
does not require a pause between data accesses. Because of its higher cost, it is used mostly
for smaller high-speed tasks, such as fast memory and caches.
Synchronous dynamic random access memory (SDRAM) is one of many subcategories
of DRAM. It can run at much higher clock speeds than conventional memory. SDRAM
synchronizes itself with the processor bus because it is clocked. Internally the data is fetched
from memory cells, pipelined, and ﬁnally brought out on the bus in a burst. The old-style
DRAM is asynchronous, so does not burst as efﬁciently as SDRAM.
1.3.4
Peripherals
Embedded systems that interact with the outside world need some form of peripheral
device. A peripheral device performs input and output functions for the chip by connecting
to other devices or sensors that are off-chip. Each peripheral device usually performs a single
function and may reside on-chip. Peripherals range from a simple serial communication
device to a more complex 802.11 wireless device.
All ARM peripherals are memory mapped—the programming interface is a set of
memory-addressed registers. The address of these registers is an offset from a speciﬁc
peripheral base address.
Controllers are specialized peripherals that implement higher levels of functionality
within an embedded system. Two important types of controllers are memory controllers
and interrupt controllers.
1.3.4.1
Memory Controllers
Memory controllers connect different types of memory to the processor bus. On power-up
a memory controller is conﬁgured in hardware to allow certain memory devices to be active.
These memory devices allow the initialization code to be executed. Some memory devices
must be set up by software; for example, when using DRAM, you ﬁrst have to set up the
memory timings and refresh rate before it can be accessed.

12
Chapter 1 ARM Embedded Systems
1.3.4.2
Interrupt Controllers
When a peripheral or device requires attention, it raises an interrupt to the processor.
An interrupt controller provides a programmable governing policy that allows software to
determine which peripheral or device can interrupt the processor at any speciﬁc time by
setting the appropriate bits in the interrupt controller registers.
There are two types of interrupt controller available for the ARM processor: the standard
interrupt controller and the vector interrupt controller (VIC).
The standard interrupt controller sends an interrupt signal to the processor core when
an external device requests servicing. It can be programmed to ignore or mask an individual
device or set of devices. The interrupt handler determines which device requires servicing
by reading a device bitmap register in the interrupt controller.
The VIC is more powerful than the standard interrupt controller because it prioritizes
interrupts and simpliﬁes the determination of which device caused the interrupt. After
associating a priority and a handler address with each interrupt, the VIC only asserts an
interrupt signal to the core if the priority of a new interrupt is higher than the currently
executing interrupt handler. Depending on its type, the VIC will either call the standard
interrupt exception handler, which can load the address of the handler for the device from
the VIC, or cause the core to jump to the handler for the device directly.
1.4 Embedded System Software
An embedded system needs software to drive it. Figure 1.4 shows four typical software
components required to control an embedded device. Each software component in the
stack uses a higher level of abstraction to separate the code from the hardware device.
Theinitializationcodeistheﬁrstcodeexecutedontheboardandisspeciﬁctoaparticular
target or group of targets. It sets up the minimum parts of the board before handing control
over to the operating system.
Application
Operating system
Initialization
Device drivers
Hardware device
Figure 1.4
Software abstraction layers executing on hardware.

1.4 Embedded System Software
13
The operating system provides an infrastructure to control applications and manage
hardware system resources. Many embedded systems do not require a full operating system
but merely a simple task scheduler that is either event or poll driven.
The device drivers are the third component shown in Figure 1.4. They provide
a consistent software interface to the peripherals on the hardware device.
Finally, an application performs one of the tasks required for a device. For example,
a mobile phone might have a diary application. There may be multiple applications running
on the same device, controlled by the operating system.
The software components can run from ROM or RAM. ROM code that is ﬁxed on the
device (for example, the initialization code) is called ﬁrmware.
1.4.1
Initialization (Boot) Code
Initialization code (or boot code) takes the processor from the reset state to a state where the
operating system can run. It usually conﬁgures the memory controller and processor caches
and initializes some devices. In a simple system the operating system might be replaced by
a simple scheduler or debug monitor.
Theinitializationcodehandlesanumberofadministrativetaskspriortohandingcontrol
over to an operating system image. We can group these different tasks into three phases:
initial hardware conﬁguration, diagnostics, and booting.
Initial hardware conﬁguration involves setting up the target platform so it can boot
an image. Although the target platform itself comes up in a standard conﬁguration, this
conﬁguration normally requires modiﬁcation to satisfy the requirements of the booted
image. For example, the memory system normally requires reorganization of the memory
map, as shown in Example 1.1.
Diagnostics are often embedded in the initialization code. Diagnostic code tests the
system by exercising the hardware target to check if the target is in working order. It also
tracks down standard system-related issues. This type of testing is important for manu-
facturing since it occurs after the software product is complete. The primary purpose of
diagnostic code is fault identiﬁcation and isolation.
Booting involves loading an image and handing control over to that image. The boot
process itself can be complicated if the system must boot different operating systems or
different versions of the same operating system.
Booting an image is the ﬁnal phase, but ﬁrst you must load the image. Loading an image
involves anything from copying an entire program including code and data into RAM, to
just copying a data area containing volatile variables into RAM. Once booted, the system
hands over control by modifying the program counter to point into the start of the image.
Sometimes, to reduce the image size, an image is compressed. The image is then
decompressed either when it is loaded or when control is handed over to it.
Example
1.1
Initializing or organizing memory is an important part of the initialization code because
many operating systems expect a known memory layout before they can start.

14
Chapter 1 ARM Embedded Systems
Before
0xffffffff
0x00000000
I/O Regs
I/O Regs
FAST SRAM
FAST SRAM
Boot ROM
Boot ROM
DRAM
large
contiguous
block
DRAM
large
contiguous
block
After
Figure 1.5
Memory remapping.
Figure 1.5 shows memory before and after reorganization. It is common for ARM-based
embedded systems to provide for memory remapping because it allows the system to start
the initialization code from ROM at power-up. The initialization code then redeﬁnes or
remaps the memory map to place RAM at address 0x00000000—an important step because
then the exception vector table can be in RAM and thus can be reprogrammed. We will
discuss the vector table in more detail in Section 2.4.
■
1.4.2
Operating System
The initialization process prepares the hardware for an operating system to take
control. An operating system organizes the system resources: the peripherals, memory,
and processing time. With an operating system controlling these resources, they can be
efﬁciently used by different applications running within the operating system environment.
ARM processors support over 50 operating systems. We can divide operating systems
into two main categories: real-time operating systems (RTOSs) and platform operating
systems.
RTOSs provide guaranteed response times to events. Different operating systems have
different amounts of control over the system response time. A hard real-time application
requires a guaranteed response to work at all. In contrast, a soft real-time application
requires a good response time, but the performance degrades more gracefully if the response
time overruns. Systems running an RTOS generally do not have secondary storage.
Platform operating systems require a memory management unit to manage large, non-
real-time applications and tend to have secondary storage. The Linux operating system is
a typical example of a platform operating system.

1.5 Summary
15
These two categories of operating system are not mutually exclusive: there are operat-
ing systems that use an ARM core with a memory management unit and have real-time
characteristics. ARM has developed a set of processor cores that speciﬁcally target each
category.
1.4.3
Applications
The operating system schedules applications—code dedicated to handling a particular task.
An application implements a processing task; the operating system controls the environ-
ment. An embedded system can have one active application or several applications running
simultaneously.
ARM processors are found in numerous market segments, including networking, auto-
motive, mobile and consumer devices, mass storage, and imaging. Within each segment
ARM processors can be found in multiple applications.
For example, the ARM processor is found in networking applications like home
gateways, DSL modems for high-speed Internet communication, and 802.11 wireless
communication. The mobile device segment is the largest application area for ARM pro-
cessors because of mobile phones. ARM processors are also found in mass storage devices
such as hard drives and imaging products such as inkjet printers—applications that are cost
sensitive and high volume.
In contrast, ARM processors are not found in applications that require leading-edge
high performance. Because these applications tend to be low volume and high cost, ARM
has decided not to focus designs on these types of applications.
1.5 Summary
Pure RISC is aimed at high performance, but ARM uses a modiﬁed RISC design philosophy
that also targets good code density and low power consumption. An embedded system
consists of a processor core surrounded by caches, memory, and peripherals. The system is
controlled by operating system software that manages application tasks.
The key points in a RISC design philosophy are to improve performance by reducing
the complexity of instructions, to speed up instruction processing by using a pipeline, to
provide a large register set to store data near the core, and to use a load-store architecture.
The ARM design philosophy also incorporates some non-RISC ideas:
■
It allows variable cycle execution on certain instructions to save power, area, and
code size.
■
It adds a barrel shifter to expand the capability of certain instructions.
■
It uses the Thumb 16-bit instruction set to improve code density.

C h a p t e r
ARM Processor
Fundamentals 2
Chapter 1 covered embedded systems with an ARM processor. In this chapter we will focus
on the actual processor itself. First, we will provide an overview of the processor core and
describe how data moves between its different parts. We will describe the programmer’s
model from a software developer’s view of the ARM processor, which will show you the
functions of the processor core and how different parts interact. We will also take a look at
the core extensions that form an ARM processor. Core extensions speed up and organize
main memory as well as extend the instruction set. We will then cover the revisions to the
ARM core architecture by describing the ARM core naming conventions used to identify
them and the chronological changes to the ARM instruction set architecture. The ﬁnal
section introduces the architecture implementations by subdividing them into speciﬁc
ARM processor core families.
A programmer can think of an ARM core as functional units connected by data buses,
as shown in Figure 2.1, where, the arrows represent the ﬂow of data, the lines represent the
buses, and the boxes represent either an operation unit or a storage area. The ﬁgure shows
not only the ﬂow of data but also the abstract components that make up an ARM core.
Data enters the processor core through the Data bus. The data may be an instruction to
execute or a data item. Figure 2.1 shows a Von Neumann implementation of the ARM—
data items and instructions share the same bus. In contrast, Harvard implementations of
the ARM use two different buses.
The instruction decoder translates instructions before they are executed. Each
instruction executed belongs to a particular instruction set.
The ARM processor, like all RISC processors, uses a load-store architecture. This
means it has two instruction types for transferring data in and out of the processor: load
instructions copy data from memory to registers in the core, and conversely the store
19

20
Chapter 2 ARM Processor Fundamentals
Data
Sign extend
Write
Read
r15
pc
Rd
Rn
Rm
A
A
B Acc
B
N
Result
Register file
r0–r15
ALU
MAC
Address register
Address
Incrementer
Barrel shifter
Instruction
decoder
Figure 2.1
ARM core dataﬂow model.
instructions copy data from registers to memory. There are no data processing instructions
that directly manipulate data in memory. Thus, data processing is carried out solely in
registers.
Data items are placed in the register ﬁle—a storage bank made up of 32-bit registers.
Since the ARM core is a 32-bit processor, most instructions treat the registers as holding
signed or unsigned 32-bit values. The sign extend hardware converts signed 8-bit and 16-bit
numbers to 32-bit values as they are read from memory and placed in a register.
ARM instructions typically have two source registers, Rn and Rm, and a single result or
destination register, Rd. Source operands are read from the register ﬁle using the internal
buses A and B, respectively.
The ALU (arithmetic logic unit) or MAC (multiply-accumulate unit) takes the regis-
ter values Rn and Rm from the A and B buses and computes a result. Data processing
instructions write the result in Rd directly to the register ﬁle. Load and store instructions
use the ALU to generate an address to be held in the address register and broadcast on the
Address bus.

2.1 Registers
21
One important feature of the ARM is that register Rm alternatively can be preprocessed
in the barrel shifter before it enters the ALU. Together the barrel shifter and ALU can
calculate a wide range of expressions and addresses.
After passing through the functional units, the result in Rd is written back to the register
ﬁle using the Result bus. For load and store instructions the incrementer updates the address
register before the core reads or writes the next register value from or to the next sequential
memory location. The processor continues executing instructions until an exception or
interrupt changes the normal execution ﬂow.
Now that you have an overview of the processor core we’ll take a more detailed look
at some of the key components of the processor: the registers, the current program status
register (cpsr), and the pipeline.
2.1 Registers
General-purpose registers hold either data or an address. They are identiﬁed with the
letter r preﬁxed to the register number. For example, register 4 is given the label r4.
Figure 2.2 shows the active registers available in user mode—a protected mode normally
r0
r1
r2
r3
r4
r5
r6
r7
r8
r9
r10
r11
r12
r13 sp
r14 lr
r15 pc
cpsr
-
Figure 2.2
Registers available in user mode.

22
Chapter 2 ARM Processor Fundamentals
used when executing applications. The processor can operate in seven different modes,
which we will introduce shortly. All the registers shown are 32 bits in size.
There are up to 18 active registers: 16 data registers and 2 processor status registers. The
data registers are visible to the programmer as r0 to r15.
The ARM processor has three registers assigned to a particular task or special function:
r13, r14, and r15. They are frequently given different labels to differentiate them from the
other registers.
In Figure 2.2, the shaded registers identify the assigned special-purpose registers:
■
Register r13 is traditionally used as the stack pointer (sp) and stores the head of the stack
in the current processor mode.
■
Register r14 is called the link register (lr) and is where the core puts the return address
whenever it calls a subroutine.
■
Register r15 is the program counter (pc) and contains the address of the next instruction
to be fetched by the processor.
Depending upon the context, registers r13 and r14 can also be used as general-purpose
registers, which can be particularly useful since these registers are banked during a processor
mode change. However, it is dangerous to use r13 as a general register when the processor
is running any form of operating system because operating systems often assume that r13
always points to a valid stack frame.
In ARM state the registers r0 to r13 are orthogonal—any instruction that you can apply
to r0 you can equally well apply to any of the other registers. However, there are instructions
that treat r14 and r15 in a special way.
In addition to the 16 data registers, there are two program status registers: cpsr and spsr
(the current and saved program status registers, respectively).
The register ﬁle contains all the registers available to a programmer. Which registers are
visible to the programmer depend upon the current mode of the processor.
2.2 Current Program Status Register
The ARM core uses the cpsr to monitor and control internal operations. The cpsr is a
dedicated 32-bit register and resides in the register ﬁle. Figure 2.3 shows the basic layout
of a generic program status register. Note that the shaded parts are reserved for future
expansion.
The cpsr is divided into four ﬁelds, each 8 bits wide: ﬂags, status, extension, and control.
In current designs the extension and status ﬁelds are reserved for future use. The control
ﬁeld contains the processor mode, state, and interrupt mask bits. The ﬂags ﬁeld contains
the condition ﬂags.
Some ARM processor cores have extra bits allocated. For example, the J bit, which can
be found in the ﬂags ﬁeld, is only available on Jazelle-enabled processors, which execute

2.2 Current Program Status Register
23
Fields
Bit
Function
Condition
flags
Interrupt
Masks
Processor
mode
Thumb
state
31 30 29 28
N Z C V
7 6 5 4
0
I F T
Mode
Flags
Status
Extension
Control
Figure 2.3
A generic program status register (psr).
8-bit instructions. We will discuss Jazelle more in Section 2.2.3. It is highly probable that
future designs will assign extra bits for the monitoring and control of new features.
For a full description of the cpsr, refer to Appendix B.
2.2.1
Processor Modes
The processor mode determines which registers are active and the access rights to the cpsr
register itself. Each processor mode is either privileged or nonprivileged: A privileged mode
allows full read-write access to the cpsr. Conversely, a nonprivileged mode only allows read
access to the control ﬁeld in the cpsr but still allows read-write access to the condition ﬂags.
There are seven processor modes in total: six privileged modes (abort, fast interrupt
request, interrupt request, supervisor, system, and undeﬁned) and one nonprivileged mode
(user).
The processor enters abort mode when there is a failed attempt to access memory. Fast
interrupt request and interrupt request modes correspond to the two interrupt levels available
on the ARM processor. Supervisor mode is the mode that the processor is in after reset and
is generally the mode that an operating system kernel operates in. System mode is a special
version of user mode that allows full read-write access to the cpsr. Undeﬁned mode is used
when the processor encounters an instruction that is undeﬁned or not supported by the
implementation. User mode is used for programs and applications.
2.2.2
Banked Registers
Figure 2.4 shows all 37 registers in the register ﬁle. Of those, 20 registers are hidden from
a program at different times. These registers are called banked registers and are identiﬁed
by the shading in the diagram. They are available only when the processor is in a particular

24
Chapter 2 ARM Processor Fundamentals
User and
system
Fast
interrupt
request
Interrupt
request
Supervisor
Undefined
Abort
r0
r1
r2
r3
r4
r5
r6
r7
r8
r9
r10
r11
r12
r13 sp
r14 lr
r15 pc
cpsr
-
r8_ fiq
r9_ fiq
r10_ fiq
r11_ fiq
r12_ fiq
r13_ fiq
r14_ fiq
spsr_ fiq
r13_irq
r14_irq
spsr_irq
r13_svc
r14_svc
spsr_svc
r13_undef
r14_undef
spsr_undef
r13_abt
r14_abt
spsr_abt
Figure 2.4
Complete ARM register set.
mode; for example, abort mode has banked registers r13_abt, r14_abt and spsr_abt. Banked
registers of a particular mode are denoted by an underline character post-ﬁxed to the mode
mnemonic or _mode.
Every processor mode except user mode can change mode by writing directly to the
mode bits of the cpsr. All processor modes except system mode have a set of associated
banked registers that are a subset of the main 16 registers. A banked register maps one-to-
one onto a user mode register. If you change processor mode, a banked register from the
new mode will replace an existing register.
For example, when the processor is in the interrupt request mode, the instructions you
execute still access registers named r13 and r14. However, these registers are the banked
registers r13_irq and r14_irq. The user mode registers r13_usr and r14_usr are not affected
by the instruction referencing these registers. A program still has normal access to the other
registers r0 to r12.
The processor mode can be changed by a program that writes directly to the cpsr (the
processor core has to be in privileged mode) or by hardware when the core responds to

2.2 Current Program Status Register
25
User mode
Interrupt
request
mode
r0
r1
r2
r3
r4
r5
r6
r7
r8
r9
r10
r11
r12
r13 sp
r14 lr
r15 pc
cpsr
-
r13_irq
r14_irq
spsr_irq
Figure 2.5
Changing mode on an exception.
an exception or interrupt. The following exceptions and interrupts cause a mode change:
reset, interrupt request, fast interrupt request, software interrupt, data abort, prefetch abort,
and undeﬁned instruction. Exceptions and interrupts suspend the normal execution of
sequential instructions and jump to a speciﬁc location.
Figure 2.5 illustrates what happens when an interrupt forces a mode change. The ﬁgure
shows the core changing from user mode to interrupt request mode, which happens when an
interrupt request occurs due to an external device raising an interrupt to the processor core.
This change causes user registers r13 and r14 to be banked. The user registers are replaced
with registers r13_irq and r14_irq, respectively. Note r14_irq contains the return address
and r13_irq contains the stack pointer for interrupt request mode.
Figure 2.5 also shows a new register appearing in interrupt request mode: the saved
program status register (spsr), which stores the previous mode’s cpsr. You can see in the
diagram the cpsr being copied into spsr_irq. To return back to user mode, a special return
instruction is used that instructs the core to restore the original cpsr from the spsr_irq and
bank in the user registers r13 and r14. Note that the spsr can only be modiﬁed and read in a
privileged mode. There is no spsr available in user mode.

26
Chapter 2 ARM Processor Fundamentals
Table 2.1
Processor mode.
Mode
Abbreviation
Privileged
Mode[4:0]
Abort
abt
yes
10111
Fast interrupt request
ﬁq
yes
10001
Interrupt request
irq
yes
10010
Supervisor
svc
yes
10011
System
sys
yes
11111
Undeﬁned
und
yes
11011
User
usr
no
10000
Another important feature to note is that the cpsr is not copied into the spsr when a
mode change is forced due to a program writing directly to the cpsr. The saving of the cpsr
only occurs when an exception or interrupt is raised.
Figure 2.3 shows that the current active processor mode occupies the ﬁve least signiﬁcant
bits of the cpsr. When power is applied to the core, it starts in supervisor mode, which is
privileged. Starting in a privileged mode is useful since initialization code can use full access
to the cpsr to set up the stacks for each of the other modes.
Table 2.1 lists the various modes and the associated binary patterns. The last column of
the table gives the bit patterns that represent each of the processor modes in the cpsr.
2.2.3
State and Instruction Sets
The state of the core determines which instruction set is being executed. There are three
instruction sets: ARM, Thumb, and Jazelle. The ARM instruction set is only active when
the processor is in ARM state. Similarly the Thumb instruction set is only active when
the processor is in Thumb state. Once in Thumb state the processor is executing purely
Thumb 16-bit instructions. You cannot intermingle sequential ARM, Thumb, and Jazelle
instructions.
The Jazelle J and Thumb T bits in the cpsr reﬂect the state of the processor. When both
J and T bits are 0, the processor is in ARM state and executes ARM instructions. This is the
case when power is applied to the processor. When the T bit is 1, then the processor is in
Thumb state. To change states the core executes a specialized branch instruction. Table 2.2
compares the ARM and Thumb instruction set features.
The ARM designers introduced a third instruction set called Jazelle. Jazelle executes
8-bit instructions and is a hybrid mix of software and hardware designed to speed up the
execution of Java bytecodes.
To execute Java bytecodes, you require the Jazelle technology plus a specially modiﬁed
version of the Java virtual machine. It is important to note that the hardware portion of
Jazelle only supports a subset of the Java bytecodes; the rest are emulated in software.

2.2 Current Program Status Register
27
Table 2.2
ARM and Thumb instruction set features.
ARM (cpsr T = 0)
Thumb (cpsr T = 1)
Instruction size
32-bit
16-bit
Core instructions
58
30
Conditional executiona
most
only branch instructions
Data processing
instructions
access to barrel shifter and
ALU
separate barrel shifter and
ALU instructions
Program status register
read-write in privileged mode
no direct access
Register usage
15 general-purpose registers
8 general-purpose registers
+pc
+7 high registers +pc
a See Section 2.2.6.
Table 2.3
Jazelle instruction set features.
Jazelle (cpsr T = 0, J = 1)
Instruction size
8-bit
Core instructions
Over 60% of the Java bytecodes are implemented in hardware;
the rest of the codes are implemented in software.
The Jazelle instruction set is a closed instruction set and is not openly available. Table 2.3
gives the Jazelle instruction set features.
2.2.4
Interrupt Masks
Interrupt masks are used to stop speciﬁc interrupt requests from interrupting the processor.
There are two interrupt request levels available on the ARM processor core—interrupt
request (IRQ) and fast interrupt request (FIQ).
The cpsr has two interrupt mask bits, 7 and 6 (or I and F), which control the masking
of IRQ and FIQ, respectively. The I bit masks IRQ when set to binary 1, and similarly the
F bit masks FIQ when set to binary 1.
2.2.5
Condition Flags
Condition ﬂags are updated by comparisons and the result of ALU operations that specify
the S instruction sufﬁx. For example, if a SUBS subtract instruction results in a register value
of zero, then the Z ﬂag in the cpsr is set. This particular subtract instruction speciﬁcally
updates the cpsr.

28
Chapter 2 ARM Processor Fundamentals
Table 2.4
Condition ﬂags.
Flag
Flag name
Set when
Q
Saturation
the result causes an overﬂow and/or saturation
V
oVerﬂow
the result causes a signed overﬂow
C
Carry
the result causes an unsigned carry
Z
Zero
the result is zero, frequently used to indicate equality
N
Negative
bit 31 of the result is a binary 1
With processor cores that include the DSP extensions, the Q bit indicates if an overﬂow
or saturation has occurred in an enhanced DSP instruction. The ﬂag is “sticky” in the
sense that the hardware only sets this ﬂag. To clear the ﬂag you need to write to the cpsr
directly.
In Jazelle-enabled processors, the J bit reﬂects the state of the core; if it is set, the core is
in Jazelle state. The J bit is not generally usable and is only available on some processor cores.
To take advantage of Jazelle, extra software has to be licensed from both ARM Limited and
Sun Microsystems.
Most ARM instructions can be executed conditionally on the value of the condition
ﬂags. Table 2.4 lists the condition ﬂags and a short description on what causes them to be
set. These ﬂags are located in the most signiﬁcant bits in the cpsr. These bits are used for
conditional execution.
Figure 2.6 shows a typical value for the cpsr with both DSP extensions and Jazelle. In
this book we use a notation that presents the cpsr data in a more human readable form.
When a bit is a binary 1 we use a capital letter; when a bit is a binary 0, we use a lowercase
letter. For the condition ﬂags a capital letter shows that the ﬂag has been set. For interrupts
a capital letter shows that an interrupt is disabled.
In the cpsr example shown in Figure 2.6, the C ﬂag is the only condition ﬂag set. The rest
nzvq ﬂags are all clear. The processor is in ARM state because neither the Jazelle j or Thumb t
bits are set. The IRQ interrupts are enabled, and FIQ interrupts are disabled. Finally, you
nzCvq
j
iF
SVC
t
31 30 29 28 27
24
0 0 1 0 0
0
7 6 5 4
0
0 1 0
10011
Figure 2.6
Example: cpsr = nzCvqjiFt_SVC.

2.3 Pipeline
29
Table 2.5
Condition mnemonics.
Mnemonic
Name
Condition ﬂags
EQ
equal
Z
NE
not equal
z
CS HS
carry set/unsigned higher or same
C
CC LO
carry clear/unsigned lower
c
MI
minus/negative
N
PL
plus/positive or zero
n
VS
overﬂow
V
VC
no overﬂow
v
HI
unsigned higher
zC
LS
unsigned lower or same
Z or c
GE
signed greater than or equal
NV or nv
LT
signed less than
Nv or nV
GT
signed greater than
NzV or nzv
LE
signed less than or equal
Z or Nv or nV
AL
always (unconditional)
ignored
can see from the ﬁgure the processor is in supervisor (SVC) mode since the mode[4:0] is
equal to binary 10011.
2.2.6
Conditional Execution
Conditional execution controls whether or not the core will execute an instruction.
Most instructions have a condition attribute that determines if the core will execute it
based on the setting of the condition ﬂags. Prior to execution, the processor compares the
condition attribute with the condition ﬂags in the cpsr. If they match, then the instruction
is executed; otherwise the instruction is ignored.
The condition attribute is postﬁxed to the instruction mnemonic, which is encoded
into the instruction. Table 2.5 lists the conditional execution code mnemonics. When a
condition mnemonic is not present, the default behavior is to set it to always (AL) execute.
2.3 Pipeline
A pipeline is the mechanism a RISC processor uses to execute instructions. Using a pipeline
speeds up execution by fetching the next instruction while other instructions are being
decoded and executed. One way to view the pipeline is to think of it as an automobile
assembly line, with each stage carrying out a particular task to manufacture the vehicle.

30
Chapter 2 ARM Processor Fundamentals
Execute
Decode
Fetch
Figure 2.7
ARM7 Three-stage pipeline.
Figure 2.7 shows a three-stage pipeline:
■
Fetch loads an instruction from memory.
■
Decode identiﬁes the instruction to be executed.
■
Execute processes the instruction and writes the result back to a register.
Figure 2.8 illustrates the pipeline using a simple example. It shows a sequence of three
instructions being fetched, decoded, and executed by the processor. Each instruction takes
a single cycle to complete after the pipeline is ﬁlled.
The three instructions are placed into the pipeline sequentially. In the ﬁrst cycle the
core fetches the ADD instruction from memory. In the second cycle the core fetches the
SUB instruction and decodes the ADD instruction. In the third cycle, both the SUB and
ADD instructions are moved along the pipeline. The ADD instruction is executed, the SUB
instruction is decoded, and the CMP instruction is fetched. This procedure is called ﬁlling
the pipeline. The pipeline allows the core to execute an instruction every cycle.
As the pipeline length increases, the amount of work done at each stage is reduced,
which allows the processor to attain a higher operating frequency. This in turn increases
the performance. The system latency also increases because it takes more cycles to ﬁll the
pipeline before the core can execute an instruction. The increased pipeline length also means
there can be data dependency between certain stages. You can write code to reduce this
dependencybyusinginstructionscheduling(formoreinformationoninstructionscheduling
take a look at Chapter 6).
ADD
Execute
Decode
Fetch
ADD
SUB
ADD
SUB
CMP
Cycle 1
Cycle 2
Time
Cycle 3
Figure 2.8
Pipelined instruction sequence.

2.3 Pipeline
31
Execute
Memory
Write
Decode
Fetch
Figure 2.9
ARM9 ﬁve-stage pipeline.
Decode
Execute
Memory
Write
Issue
Fetch
Figure2.10
ARM10 six-stage pipeline.
The pipeline design for each ARM family differs. For example, The ARM9 core increases
the pipeline length to ﬁve stages, as shown in Figure 2.9. The ARM9 adds a memory and
writeback stage, which allows the ARM9 to process on average 1.1 Dhrystone MIPS per
MHz—an increase in instruction throughput by around 13% compared with an ARM7.
The maximum core frequency attainable using an ARM9 is also higher.
The ARM10 increases the pipeline length still further by adding a sixth stage, as shown
in Figure 2.10. The ARM10 can process on average 1.3 Dhrystone MIPS per MHz, about
34% more throughput than an ARM7 processor core, but again at a higher latency cost.
Even though the ARM9 and ARM10 pipelines are different, they still use the same
pipeline executing characteristics as an ARM7. Code written for the ARM7 will execute on
an ARM9 or ARM10.
2.3.1
Pipeline Executing Characteristics
The ARM pipeline has not processed an instruction until it passes completely through
the execute stage. For example, an ARM7 pipeline (with three stages) has executed an
instruction only when the fourth instruction is fetched.
Figure 2.11 shows an instruction sequence on an ARM7 pipeline. The MSR instruction
is used to enable IRQ interrupts, which only occurs once the MSR instruction completes
the execute stage of the pipeline. It clears the I bit in the cpsr to enable the IRQ inter-
rupts. Once the ADD instruction enters the execute stage of the pipeline, IRQ interrupts are
enabled.
Figure 2.12 illustrates the use of the pipeline and the program counter pc. In the execute
stage, the pc always points to the address of the instruction plus 8 bytes. In other words,
the pc always points to the address of the instruction being executed plus two instructions
ahead. This is important when the pc is used for calculating a relative offset and is an

32
Chapter 2 ARM Processor Fundamentals
MSR
Execute
Decode
Fetch
cpsr
IFt_SVC
cpsr
IFt_SVC
cpsr
iFt_SVC
MSR
ADD
MSR
ADD
AND
Cycle 1
Cycle 2
Time
Cycle 3
ADD
AND
SUB
Cycle 4
Figure2.11
ARM instruction sequence.
LDR
NOP
DCD
Execute
pc + 8
(0x8000 + 8)
Decode
Fetch
0x8000  LDR pc, [pc,#0]
0x8004  NOP
0x8008  DCD jumpAddress
Time
Figure2.12
Example: pc = address + 8.
architectural characteristic across all the pipelines. Note when the processor is in Thumb
state the pc is the instruction address plus 4.
There are three other characteristics of the pipeline worth mentioning. First, the exe-
cution of a branch instruction or branching by the direct modiﬁcation of the pc causes the
ARM core to ﬂush its pipeline.
Second, ARM10 uses branch prediction, which reduces the effect of a pipeline ﬂush by
predicting possible branches and loading the new branch address prior to the execution of
the instruction.
Third, an instruction in the execute stage will complete even though an interrupt has
been raised. Other instructions in the pipeline will be abandoned, and the processor will
start ﬁlling the pipeline from the appropriate entry in the vector table.

2.4 Exceptions, Interrupts, and the Vector Table
33
2.4 Exceptions, Interrupts, and the Vector
Table
When an exception or interrupt occurs, the processor sets the pc to a speciﬁc memory
address. The address is within a special address range called the vector table. The entries
in the vector table are instructions that branch to speciﬁc routines designed to handle a
particular exception or interrupt.
The memory map address 0x00000000 is reserved for the vector table, a set of 32-bit
words. On some processors the vector table can be optionally located at a higher address
in memory (starting at the offset 0xffff0000). Operating systems such as Linux and
Microsoft’s embedded products can take advantage of this feature.
When an exception or interrupt occurs, the processor suspends normal execution and
starts loading instructions from the exception vector table (see Table 2.6). Each vector table
entry contains a form of branch instruction pointing to the start of a speciﬁc routine:
■
Reset vector is the location of the ﬁrst instruction executed by the processor when power
is applied. This instruction branches to the initialization code.
■
Undeﬁned instruction vector is used when the processor cannot decode an instruction.
■
Software interrupt vector is called when you execute a SWI instruction. The SWI
instruction is frequently used as the mechanism to invoke an operating system routine.
■
Prefetch abort vector occurs when the processor attempts to fetch an instruction from an
address without the correct access permissions. The actual abort occurs in the decode
stage.
■
Data abort vector is similar to a prefetch abort but is raised when an instruction attempts
to access data memory without the correct access permissions.
■
Interrupt request vector is used by external hardware to interrupt the normal execution
ﬂow of the processor. It can only be raised if IRQs are not masked in the cpsr.
Table 2.6
The vector table.
Exception/interrupt
Shorthand
Address
High address
Reset
RESET
0x00000000
0xffff0000
Undeﬁned instruction
UNDEF
0x00000004
0xffff0004
Software interrupt
SWI
0x00000008
0xffff0008
Prefetch abort
PABT
0x0000000c
0xffff000c
Data abort
DABT
0x00000010
0xffff0010
Reserved
—
0x00000014
0xffff0014
Interrupt request
IRQ
0x00000018
0xffff0018
Fast interrupt request
FIQ
0x0000001c
0xffff001c

34
Chapter 2 ARM Processor Fundamentals
■
Fastinterruptrequestvectorissimilartotheinterruptrequestbutisreservedforhardware
requiring faster response times. It can only be raised if FIQs are not masked in the cpsr.
2.5 Core Extensions
The hardware extensions covered in this section are standard components placed next to the
ARM core. They improve performance, manage resources, and provide extra functionality
and are designed to provide ﬂexibility in handling particular applications. Each ARM family
has different extensions available.
There are three hardware extensions ARM wraps around the core: cache and tightly
coupled memory, memory management, and the coprocessor interface.
2.5.1
Cache and Tightly Coupled Memory
The cache is a block of fast memory placed between main memory and the core. It allows for
more efﬁcient fetches from some memory types. With a cache the processor core can run
for the majority of the time without having to wait for data from slow external memory.
Most ARM-based embedded systems use a single-level cache internal to the processor.
Of course, many small embedded systems do not require the performance gains that a
cache brings.
ARM has two forms of cache. The ﬁrst is found attached to the Von Neumann–style
cores. It combines both data and instruction into a single uniﬁed cache, as shown in
Figure 2.13. For simplicity, we have called the glue logic that connects the memory system
to the AMBA bus logic and control.
ARM core
Unified cache
Logic and control
On-chip AMBA bus
Main memory
AMBA bus interface unit
Figure2.13
A simpliﬁed Von Neumann architecture with cache.

2.5 Core Extensions
35
ARM core
Data
TCM
Instruction
TCM
Logic and control
On-chip AMBA bus
D + I
D
I
D
I
Main memory
AMBA bus interface unit
Figure2.14
A simpliﬁed Harvard architecture with TCMs.
By contrast, the second form, attached to the Harvard-style cores, has separate caches
for data and instruction.
A cache provides an overall increase in performance but at the expense of predictable
execution. But for real-time systems it is paramount that code execution is deterministic—
the time taken for loading and storing instructions or data must be predictable. This is
achieved using a form of memory called tightly coupled memory (TCM). TCM is fast SRAM
located close to the core and guarantees the clock cycles required to fetch instructions or
data—critical for real-time algorithms requiring deterministic behavior. TCMs appear as
memory in the address map and can be accessed as fast memory. An example of a processor
with TCMs is shown in Figure 2.14.
By combining both technologies, ARM processors can have both improved performance
and predictable real-time response. Figure 2.15 shows an example core with a combination
of caches and TCMs.
2.5.2
Memory Management
Embedded systems often use multiple memory devices. It is usually necessary to have a
method to help organize these devices and protect the system from applications trying to
make inappropriate accesses to hardware. This is achieved with the assistance of memory
management hardware.
ARMcoreshavethreedifferenttypesofmemorymanagementhardware—noextensions
providing no protection, a memory protection unit (MPU) providing limited protection,
and a memory management unit (MMU) providing full protection:
■
Nonprotected memory is ﬁxed and provides very little ﬂexibility. It is normally used for
small, simple embedded systems that require no protection from rogue applications.

36
Chapter 2 ARM Processor Fundamentals
ARM core
Data
TCM
Data
cache
Instruction
cache
Instruction
TCM
Logic and control
On-chip AMBA bus
D + I
D
I
D
I
D
I
Main memory
AMBA bus interface unit
Figure2.15
A simpliﬁed Harvard architecture with caches and TCMs.
■
MPUs employ a simple system that uses a limited number of memory regions. These
regions are controlled with a set of special coprocessor registers, and each region is
deﬁned with speciﬁc access permissions. This type of memory management is used
for systems that require memory protection but don’t have a complex memory map.
The MPU is explained in Chapter 13.
■
MMUs are the most comprehensive memory management hardware available on the
ARM. The MMU uses a set of translation tables to provide ﬁne-grained control over
memory. These tables are stored in main memory and provide a virtual-to-physical
address map as well as access permissions. MMUs are designed for more sophisti-
cated platform operating systems that support multitasking. The MMU is explained in
Chapter 14.
2.5.3
Coprocessors
Coprocessors can be attached to the ARM processor. A coprocessor extends the processing
features of a core by extending the instruction set or by providing conﬁguration reg-
isters. More than one coprocessor can be added to the ARM core via the coprocessor
interface.
The coprocessor can be accessed through a group of dedicated ARM instructions
that provide a load-store type interface. Consider, for example, coprocessor 15: The
ARM processor uses coprocessor 15 registers to control the cache, TCMs, and memory
management.
The coprocessor can also extend the instruction set by providing a specialized group
of new instructions. For example, there are a set of specialized instructions that can

2.6 Architecture Revisions
37
be added to the standard ARM instruction set to process vector ﬂoating-point (VFP)
operations.
These new instructions are processed in the decode stage of the ARM pipeline. If the
decode stage sees a coprocessor instruction, then it offers it to the relevant coprocessor.
But if the coprocessor is not present or doesn’t recognize the instruction, then the ARM
takes an undeﬁned instruction exception, which allows you to emulate the behavior of the
coprocessor in software.
2.6 Architecture Revisions
Every ARM processor implementation executes a speciﬁc instruction set architecture (ISA),
although an ISA revision may have more than one processor implementation.
The ISA has evolved to keep up with the demands of the embedded market. This
evolution has been carefully managed by ARM, so that code written to execute on an earlier
architecture revision will also execute on a later revision of the architecture.
Before we go on to explain the evolution of the architecture, we must introduce the ARM
processor nomenclature. The nomenclature identiﬁes individual processors and provides
basic information about the feature set.
2.6.1
Nomenclature
ARM uses the nomenclature shown in Figure 2.16 to describe the processor implemen-
tations. The letters and numbers after the word “ARM” indicate the features a processor
ARM{x}{y}{z}{T}{D}{M}{I}{E}{J}{F}{-S}
x—family
y—memory management/protection unit
z—cache
T—Thumb 16-bit decoder
D—JTAG debug
M—fast multiplier
I—EmbeddedICE macrocell
E—enhanced instructions (assumes TDMI)
J—Jazelle
F—vector ﬂoating-point unit
S—synthesizible version
Figure2.16
ARM nomenclature.
