MICROCONTROLLER(BCS402) 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Exception and Interrupt Handling: Exception handling, ARM 
processor exceptions and modes, vector table, exception priorities, link 
register offsets, interrupts, assigning interrupts, interrupt latency, IRQ and 
FIQ exceptions, basic interrupt stack design and implementation.  
Firmware: Firmware and bootloader, ARM firmware suite, Red Hat 
redboot, Example: sandstone, sandstone  
directory layout, sandstone code structure.  
Textbook 1: Chapter 9.1 and 9.2, Chapter 10  
RBT: L1, L2, L3 
Introduction: 
Exceptions and interrupts are unexpected events which will disrupt the 
normal flow of execution of instruction. An exception is an unexpected 
event from within the processor. Interrupt is an unexpected event from 
outside the process.Whenever an exception or interrupt occurs, the 
hardware starts executing the code that performs an action in response to 
the exception. 
The following types of action can cause an exception: 
⚫ Reset   is called  by the processor when power is applied. This 
instruction branches to the initialization code.  
⚫ Undefined instruction  is used when the processor cannot decode an 
instruction.  
⚫ Software interrupt  is called when we execute a SWI instruction. The 
SWI instruction is frequently used as the mechanism to invoke an 
operating system routine.  
⚫ Prefetch abort  occurs when the processor attempts to fetch an 
instruction from an address without the correct access permissions. 
The actual abort occurs in the decode stage.  
⚫ Data abort  is similar to a prefetch abort but is raised when an 
instruction attempts to access data memory without the correct access 
permissions.  
⚫ Interrupt request is used by external hardware to interrupt the normal 
execution flow of the processor. It can only be raised if IRQs are not 
masked in the cpsr. 
 
4.1 Exception handling 
An exception is any condition that needs to halt the normal sequential 
execution of instructions. 
Example for exceptions are: ARM core  reset, instruction fetch or 
memory access failure, an undefined instruction fetch ,execution of  
software interrupt instruction ,when an external interrupt has been raised. 
MODULE-4

MICROCONTROLLER(BCS402) 
 
2 
Exception handling is the method of processing these exceptions.Most 
exceptions have an associated software exception handler. Software 
exception handler are software routine that executes when an exception 
occurs. The handler first determines the cause of the exception and then 
services the exception.Servicing takes place either within the handler or 
by branching to a specific service routine. 
The Reset exception is a special case of exception and it is used to 
initialize an embedded system. 
 
4.1.1 ARM Processor Exceptions and Modes 
 
Whenever an exception occurs, the core  enter a specific mode. The ARM 
processor modes can be entered manually by changing the cpsr. 
 When an exception occurs the ARM processor always switches to ARM 
state. Figure 4.1 shows an exceptions and associated modes. 
 
Figure 4.1 Exceptions and associated modes. 
The user and system mode are the only two modes that are not entered 
by an exception. 
When an exception causes a mode change, the core automatically  
■ saves the cpsr to the spsr of the exception mode  
■ saves the pc to the lr of the exception mode 
■ sets the cpsr to the exception mode  
■ sets pc to the address of the exception handler 
 
4.1.2 Vector Table 
The vector table is a table of addresses that the ARM core branches to  
when an exception is raised.These addresses  contain branch instructions 
The memory map address 0x00000000 is reserved for the vector table, a 
set of 32-bit words. On some processors the vector table can be optionally 
located at a higher address in memory (starting at the offset 0xffff0000). 
 
 

MICROCONTROLLER(BCS402) 
 
3 
 
Table 4.2 Vector table and processor modes 
 
  The branch instruction can be any of the following forms: 
B <address>—This branch instruction provides a branch relative from 
the pc. 
LDR pc, [pc, #offset]—This load register instruction loads the handler 
address from memory to the pc. This form gives slight delay in branching 
as it need the extra memory access. But using this form we can branch to 
any address in memory. 
LDR pc, [pc, #-0xff0]—This load register instruction loads a specific 
interrupt service routine address from address 0xfffff030 to the pc. This 
specific instruction is  used when a vector interrupt controller is present 
(VIC PL190). 
MOV pc, #immediate—This move instruction copies an immediate value 
into the pc.The address must be an 8-bit immediate rotated right by an 
even number of bits. 
 
Figure 4.2 Example vector table. 
 
4.1.3 Exception Priorities 
Exceptions can occur simultaneously, so the processor has to adopt a 
priority mechanism.Each exception is dealt with according to the priority 
level set out in Table 9.3. 
Table 9.3 shows the various exceptions that occur on the ARM processor 
and their associated priority level. 

MICROCONTROLLER(BCS402) 
 
4 
 
Table 4.3 Exception priority levels. 
◆ The Reset exception is the highest priority and it occurs when power 
is applied to the processor. The reset handler initializes the system, 
and setting up memory and caches.The reset handler must also set up 
the stack pointers for all processor modes.When a reset occurs, it 
takes precedence over all other exceptions. 
◆ The lowest priority level is shared by two exceptions, the Software 
Interrupt and Undefined Instruction exceptions. 
◆ As shown in the table Certain exceptions also disable interrupts by 
setting the I or F bits in the cpsr 
◆ Code should be designed such that there is no exceptions or interrupts 
will occur during the first few instructions of the handler. 
◆ Data Abort exceptions occur when the memory controller or MMU 
indicates that an invalid memory address has been accessed or when 
the current code attempts to read or write to memory without the  
correct access permissions.When Data Abort occurs, it takes  
 
precedence over all other exceptions except Reset exception. 
 
◆ A Fast Interrupt Request (FIQ) exception occurs when an external 
peripheral sets the FIQ pin to nFIQ. An FIQ exception is the highest 
priority interrupt.The core disables both IRQ and FIQ exceptions on 
entry into the FIQ handler. Thus, no external source can interrupt the 
processor unless the IRQ and/or FIQ exceptions are reenabled by 
software.  
◆ An Interrupt Request (IRQ) exception occurs when an external 
peripheral sets the IRQ pin to nIRQ. An IRQ exception is the second-
highest priority interrupt. The IRQ handler will be entered if neither 
an FIQ exception nor Data Abort exception occurs. On entry to the 
IRQ handler, the IRQ exceptions are disabled and should remain 
disabled until the current interrupt source has been cleared. 
◆ A Prefetch Abort exception occurs when an attempt to fetch an 
instruction results in a memory fault. This exception is raised when 
the instruction is in the execute stage of the pipeline and if none of the 
higher exceptions have been raised. After enter to the handler, IRQ 

MICROCONTROLLER(BCS402) 
 
5 
exceptions will be disabled, but the FIQ exceptions will remain 
unchanged.If FIQ is enabled and an FIQ exception occurs, it can be 
taken while servicing the Prefetch Abort. 
◆ A Software Interrupt (SWI) exception occurs when the SWI 
instruction is executed and none of the other higher-priority 
exceptions have been flagged. On entry to the handler,  
◆ the cpsr will be set to supervisor mode.If the system uses nested SWI 
calls, the link register r14 and spsr must be stored away before 
branching to the nested SWI to avoid possible corruption of the link 
register and the spsr. 
◆ An Undefined Instruction exception occurs when an instruction not in 
the ARM or Thumb instruction set reaches the execute stage of the 
pipeline and none of the other exceptions have been flagged. The ARM 
processor “asks” the coprocessors if they can handle this as a 
coprocessor instruction. Since coprocessors follow the pipeline, 
instruction identification can take place in the execute stage of the core. 
If none of the coprocessors claims the instruction, an Undefined 
Instruction exception is raised.Both the SWI instruction and Undefined 
Instruction have the same level of priority, since they cannot occur at the 
same time. 
4.1.4 Link Register Offsets 
 
When an exception occurs, the link register is set to a specific address 
based on the current pc. 
For example when an IRQ exception is raised, the link register lr points to 
the last executed instruction plus 8 because of  three stage pipeline. Care 
has to be taken to make sure the exception handler does not corrupt lr 
because lr is used to return from an exception handler. The IRQ exception 
is taken only after the current instruction is executed, so the return 
address has to point to the next instruction, or lr − 4. 
Table 4.4 provides a list of useful addresses for the different  exceptions. 
 
Table 4.4 Useful link-register-based addresses. 
 
 
 
 

MICROCONTROLLER(BCS402) 
 
6 
Example(1) 
This show the method of returning from an IRQ and FIQ handler is to use 
a SUBS instruction: 
 
Since there is an S at the end of the SUB instruction and the pc  is the 
destination register, the cpsr is automatically restored from the spsr 
register. 
Example (2) 
This example shows another method that subtracts the offset from the 
link register r14 at the beginning of the handler. 
 
After servicing is complete, return to normal execution occurs by moving 
the link register r14 into the pc and restoring cpsr from the spsr. 
 
Example (3) 
The example uses the interrupt stack to store the link register. This 
method first subtracts an offset from the link register and then stores it 
onto the interrupt stack. 
 
 
To return to normal execution, the LDM instruction is used to load the pc. 
The ˆ symbol in the instruction forces the cpsr to be restored from the spsr. 
 
 
4.2 Interrupts 
There are two types of interrupts available on the ARM processor. The 
first type of interrupt causes an exception raised by an external 
peripheral—namely, IRQ and FIQ.  
 
 

MICROCONTROLLER(BCS402) 
 
7 
The second type is a specific instruction that causes an exception—the 
SWI instruction.  
Both types suspend the normal flow of a program. 
4.2.1 Assigning Interrupts 
A system designer can decide which hardware peripheral can produce 
which interrupt request. This decision can be implemented in hardware or 
software (or both) and depends upon the embedded system being used. 
An interrupt controller unit is used to  connects multiple external 
interrupts to one of the two ARM interrupt requests either IRQ or FIQ. 
The system designers will use a standard design practice to assigning 
interrupts. 
◆ Software Interrupts are normally reserved to call privileged operating 
system routines. For example, an SWI instruction can be used to 
change a program running in user mode to a privileged mode. 
◆ IRQ Requests are normally assigned for general-purpose interrupts. 
The IRQ exception has a lower priority and higher interrupt latency 
than the FIQ exception. 
◆ Fast Interrupt Requests are normally reserved for a single interrupt 
source that requires a fast response time. 
◆ In an embedded operating system design, the FIQ exception is used 
for a specific application and  the IRQ exception  are used for more 
general operating system activities. 
 
4.2.2 Interrupt Latency 
 It is the time interval, from an external interrupt request signal being 
raised to the first fetch of an instruction of a specific interrupt service 
routine (ISR). 
Interrupt latency depends on a combination of hardware and software. 
System designer must balance the system design to handle multiple 
simultaneous interrupt sources and minimize interrupt latency. 
If the interrupts are not handled in a timely manner, then the system will 
exhibit slow response times. 
Software handlers have two main methods to minimize interrupt latency.  
1) Nested interrupt handler, 
2) Prioritization. 
Nested interrupt handler 
Nested interrupt handler allows other interrupts to occur even when it is 
currently servicing an existing interrupt. 
This is achieved by reenabling the interrupts as soon as the interrupt 
source has been serviced but before the interrupt handling is complete.  
Once a nested interrupt has been serviced, then control is relinquished to 
the original interrupt service routine. Fig 4.3 shows the three level nested 
interrupt, 

MICROCONTROLLER(BCS402) 
 
8 
 
 
Figure 4.3 A three-level nested interrupt. 
 
Prioritization 
We can program the interrupt controller to ignore interrupts of the same 
or lower priority than the interrupt we are handling presently, so only  
a higher-priority task can interrupt our handler. We then re-enable the 
interrupts. The processor spends time in the lower-priority interrupts until 
a higher-priority interupt occurs. Therefore higher-priority interrupts have 
a lower average interrupt latency  than the lower-priority interrupts. 
It reduces latency by speeding up the completion time on the critical 
time-sensitive interrupts. 
 
4.2.3 IRQ and FIQ Exceptions 
 
IRQ and FIQ exceptions only occur when a specific interrupt mask is 
cleared in the cpsr. 
The ARM processor will continue executing the current instruction in the 
execution stage of the pipeline before handling the interrupt. 
An IRQ or FIQ exception causes the processor hardware to go through a 
standard procedure listed below, 
1)  The processor changes to a specific interrupt request mode, which  
being raised.  
2)  The previous mode’s cpsr is saved into the spsr of the new interrupt 
request mode.  
3) The pc is saved in the lr of the new interrupt request mode.  
4) Interrupt/s are disabled—either the IRQ or both IRQ and FIQ 
exceptions are disabled in the cpsr. This immediately stops another 
interrupt request of the same type being raised.  

MICROCONTROLLER(BCS402) 
 
9 
5) The processor branches to a specific entry in the vector table. 
 
Example 4.5: what happens when an IRQ exception is raised when the 
processor is in user mode? 
 
 
Figure 4.4 Interrupt Request (IRQ). 
i. 
The processor starts in state 1.In this mode both the IRQ and FIQ exception  
bits in the cpsr are enabled. 
ii. When an IRQ occurs the processor moves into state 2.-> 
a) This transition automatically sets the IRQ bit to one, disabling any further 
IRQ exceptions,  
b) The FIQ exception ,remains enabled because FIQ has a higher priority and  
does not get disabled when a low-priority IRQ exception is raised, 
c) The cpsr processor mode changes to IRQ mode, 
d) The user mode cpsr is automatically copied into spsr_irq, 
e) Register r14_irq is assigned the value of the pc when the interrupt was raised,  
f) The pc is then set to the IRQ entry +0x18 in the vector table. 
iii. In state 3 the software handler takes over and calls the appropriate interrupt 
service routine to service the source of the interrupt. After completion, the 
processor mode reverts back to the original user mode code in state 1. 
 
Example 4.6 what happens when an FIQ exception is raised when the 
processor is in user mode? 
Figure 4.5 shows an example of an FIQ exception.  
 
 
Figure 4.5 Fast Interrupt Request (FIQ). 

MICROCONTROLLER(BCS402) 
 
10 
 
i)   The processor starts in state 1.In this mode both the IRQ and FIQ exception  
bits in the cpsr are enabled. 
ii)  When an FIQ occurs the processor moves into state 2.-> 
a ) 
This transition automatically sets the IRQ bit and FIQ to one, disabling 
 
both IRQ and FIQ exceptions, 
b ) 
The cpsr processor mode changes to FIQ mode, 
c )  
The user mode cpsr is automatically copied into spsr_fiq, 
d )      Register r14_fiq is assigned the value of the pc when the interrupt was 
 
 
raised,  
e ) 
The pc is then set to the FIQ entry +0x1c in the vector table. 
iii )  In state 3 the software handler takes over and calls the appropriate interrupt 
 
service routine to service the source of the interrupt. After completion, the 
 
processor mode reverts back to the original user mode code in state 1. 
iv)  When processor changes from user mode  to FIQ mode, there is no 
 
requirement to save registers r8 to r12 since these registers are banked in FIQ 
 
mode. These registers can be used to hold temporary data, such as buffer 
 
pointers or counters. This makes FIQ ideal for servicing a single-source,high-
 
priority, low-latency interrupt. 
 
4.2.3.1 Enabling and Disabling FIQ and IRQ Exceptions 
 
The ARM processor core has a simple procedure to manually enable and 
disable interrupts by modifying the cpsr when the processor is in a 
privileged mode. 
The procedure uses three ARM instructions. 
1)The instruction MRS copies the contents of the cpsr into register r1. 
2)The instruction BIC clears the IRQ or FIQ mask bit. 
3) The instruction MSR then copies the updated contents in register r1 
back into the cpsr,  to enable the interrupt request.  
 
Table 4.5 shows how IRQ and FIQ interrupts are enabled. 
 
The postfix _c identifies that the bit field being updated is the control 
field bit [7:0] of the cpsr.  
 
Table 4.5 Enabling an interrupt. 
 
 

MICROCONTROLLER(BCS402) 
 
11 
Table 4.6 shows procedure to disable or mask an interrupt request. 
 
 
Table 4.6 Disabling an interrupt. 
To enable and disable both the IRQ and FIQ exceptions , the 
immediate value on the data processing BIC or ORR instruction has to be 
changed to 0xc0. 
The interrupt request is either enabled or disabled only once the MSR 
instruction has completed the execution stage of the pipeline. Interrupts  
can still be raised or masked prior to the MSR completing this stage. 
 
4.2.4 Basic Interrupt Stack Design and Implementation 
Exceptions handlers uses the stacks to save the register contents. Each 
mode has dedicated register containing the stack pointer. The design of 
the exception stacks depends upon these factors: 
⚫ Operating system requirements—Each operating system has its own 
requirements for stack design. 
⚫ Target hardware—The target hardware provides a physical limit to 
the size and positioning of the stack in memory 
Two design decisions need to be made for the stacks:  
■ The location: which  determines where in the memory map the stack 
begins. Most ARM-based systems are designed with a stack that descends 
downwards, with the top of the stack at a high memory address.  
 
◼ Stack size:  depends upon the type of handler, nested or nonnested. A 
nested interrupt handler requires more memory space since the stack 
will grow with the number of nested interrupts. 
 
 stack overflow—when the stack extends beyond the allocated memory. 
It causes instability in embedded systems.  
There are software techniques that identify overflow and that allow 
corrective measures to take place to repair the stack before irreparable 
memory corruption occurs.  
The two main methods are  
(1)  use memory protection  
(2)  call a stack check function at the start of each routine. 

MICROCONTROLLER(BCS402) 
 
12 
 
The IRQ mode stack has to be set up during the initialization code for the 
system.The stack size is reserved in the initial stages of  boot-up . 
Figure 4.6 shows two  memory layouts in a linear address space. 
 
 
Figure 4.6 Memory layouts. 
The first layout, A, shows a traditional stack layout with the interrupt 
stack stored underneath the code segment. 
The second layout, B, shows the interrupt stack at the top of the memory 
above the user stack.  
The main advantage of layout B over A is that Layout B does not corrupt 
the vector table when a stack overflow occurs, and so the system has a 
chance to correct itself when an overflow has been identified. 
 
For each processor mode a stack has to be set up. This is carried out every 
time the processor is reset. Figure 9.7 shows an implementation of stack 
using layout A.  
 

MICROCONTROLLER(BCS402) 
 
13 
 
There is an advantage  using separate stacks for each mode rather than  
using a single stack .  Errant tasks can be debugged and isolated from the 
rest of the system. 
Each mode stack must be set up. Here is an example  to set up three 
different stacks when the processor core comes out of reset. 
Initialization code starts by setting up the stack registers for each 
processor mode. The stack register r13 is one of the registers that is 
always banked when a mode change occurs.  
 
A  set of defines are declared that map the memory region names with an 
absolute address.  
 
Example, the User stack is given the label USR_Stack and is set to 
address 0x20000. The Supervisor stack is set to an address that is 128 
bytes below the IRQ stack. 
USR_Stack    EQU        0x20000 
IRQ_Stack     EQU        0x8000 
SVC_Stack    EQU        IRQ_Stack-128 
 
 A set of defines that map each processor mode with a particular mode bit 
pattern. These labels can then be used to set the cpsr to a new mode. 
 
 
 

MICROCONTROLLER(BCS402) 
 
14 
Example to set up Supervisor mode stack: 
The processor core starts in supervisor mode so the SVC stack  
setup involves loading register r13_svc with the address pointed to by 
SVC_NewStack. 
 
 
Example to set up IRQ mode stack: 
The code first initializes the IRQ stack. 
For safety reasons, it is always best to make sure that interrupts are 
disabled by using a bitwise OR between NoInt and the new mode. 
 
 
To set up the IRQ stack, the processor mode has to change to IRQ  
mode. This is achieved by storing a cpsr bit pattern into register r2. 
Register r2 is then copied into the cpsr, placing the processor into IRQ 
mode. 
 
Example to set up user mode stack: 
The user mode stack will  be set up last because when the processor is in 
user mode there is no direct method to modify the cpsr.An alternative is 
to force the processor into system mode to set up the user mode stack 
since both modes share the same registers. 
 
 
