Microcontrollers 
BCS402 
1 
 
 
MICROCONTROLLER AND EMBEDDED SYSTEMS 
BCS402 
MODULE 1 
 
NO 
TOPIC 
1 
MICROPROCESSORS VERSUS MICROCONTROLLERS 
2 
THE RISC DESIGN PHILOSOPHY 
3 
THE ARM DESIGN PHILOSOPHY 
4 
EMBEDDED SYSTEM HARDWARE 
5 
EMBEDDED SYSTEM SOFTWARE 
6 
ARM CORE 
7 
REGISTERS 
8 
CURRENT PROGRAM STATUS REGISTER 
9 
PIPELINE 
10 
EXCEPTIONS, INTERRUPTS AND THE VECTOR TABLE 
11 
CORE EXTENSIONS 
12 
ASSIGNMENT 

Microcontrollers 
BCS402 
2 
 
 
MICROPROCESSORS VERSUS MICROCONTROLLERS 
Differentiate between microprocessor and microcontroller. 
MICROPROCESSOR 
MICROCONTROLLER 
Microprocessors  generally doesn‘t  have  RAM, 
ROM and I/O pins. 
Microcontroller is ‗all in one processor, with 
RAM, I/O ports all on the chip. 
Microprocessors usually use its pins as a bus to 
interface to RAM, ROM, and peripheral devices. 
Hence, the controlling bus is expandable at the 
board level. 
Controlling bus is internal and not available to the 
board designer. 
Microprocessors are generally capable of being 
built into bigger general purpose applications. 
Microcontrollers 
are usually used 
for more 
dedicated applications. 
Microprocessors, generally do not have power 
saving system. 
Microcontrollers have power saving system, like 
idle mode or power saving mode, so overall it uses 
less power. 
The 
overall 
cost 
of 
systems 
made 
with 
Microprocessor is high,  because  of the  high 
number of external components required. 
Microcontrollers are made by using complementary 
metal oxide semiconductor technology; so they are 
far cheaper than Microprocessors. 
Processing speed of general microprocessors is 
above 1GHz; so it works much faster than 
Microcontrollers. 
Processing speed of Microcontrollers is about 
8MHz to 50MHz. 
Microprocessors 
are 
based 
on von-Neumann 
model; where, program and data are stored in same 
memory module. 
Microcontrollers are based on Harvard architecture; 
where, program memory and data memory are 
separate. 
Web link: http://www.differencebetween.net/technology/difference-between-microprocessor-and- 
microcontroller/ 
 
THE RISC DESIGN PHILOSOPHY 
Explain RISC design philosophy. 
The ARM core uses reduced instruction set computer (RISC) architecture. RISC is a design philosophy 
aimed at delivering simple but powerful instructions that execute within a single cycle at a high clock 
speed. 
The RISC philosophy concentrates on reducing the complexity of instructions performed by the hardware 
because it is easier to provide greater flexibility and intelligence in software rather than hardware. 

Microcontrollers 
BCS402 
3 
 
 
As a result, a RISC design places greater demands on the compiler. 
In contrast, the traditional complex instruction set computer (CISC) relies more on the hardware for 
instruction functionality, and consequently the CISC instructions are more complicated. The following 
Figure illustrates these major differences. 
 
 
The RISC philosophy is implemented with four major design rules: 
1. Instructions—RISC processors have a reduced number of instruction classes. These classes provide 
simple operations that can each execute in a single cycle. The compiler or programmer synthesizes 
complicated operations (for example, a divide operation) by combining several simple instructions. Each 
instruction is having fixed length to allow the pipeline to fetch future instructions before decoding the 
current instruction. 
 In contrast, in CISC, instructions are often of variable size and take many cycles to execute. 
2. Pipelines— the processing of instructions is broken down into smaller units that can be executed in 
parallel by pipelines. Ideally the pipeline advances by one step on each cycle for maximum throughput. 
Instructions can be decoded in one pipeline stage. 
 There is no need for an instruction to be executed by a mini-program called microcode as on CISC 
processors. 
3. Registers—RISC machines have a large general-purpose register set. Any register can contain either 
data or an address. Registers act as the fast local memory store for all data processing operations. 
 In contrast, CISC processors have dedicated registers for specific purposes. 
4. Load-store architecture—the processor operates on data held in registers. Separate load and store 
instructions transfer data between the register bank and external memory. Memory accesses are costly, so 
separating memory accesses from data processing provides an advantage because you can use data items 
held in the register bank multiple times without needing multiple memory accesses. 
 In contrast, with a CISC design the data processing operations can act on memory directly. 
These design rules allow a RISC processor to be simpler, and thus the core can operate at higher clock 
frequencies. 
 In contrast, traditional CISC processors are more complex and operate at lower clock frequencies. 
Web link: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reduced_instruction_set_computer 

Microcontrollers 
BCS402 
4 
 
 
THE ARM DESIGN PHILOSOPHY 
Explain ARM design philosophy. 
How ARM instruction set differs from pure RISC definition? 
Explain properties of ARM instruction set that make the ARM instruction set 
suitable for embedded applications. 
There are a number of physical features that have driven the ARM processor design. 
 Portable embedded systems require battery power. The ARM processor has been specially 
designed to be small to reduce power consumption and extend battery operation—essential for 
applications such as mobile phones and personal digital assistants (PDAs). 
 High code density is another major requirement since embedded systems have limited memory 
due to cost and/or physical size restrictions—useful for applications that have limited on-board 
memory, such as mobile phones and mass storage devices. 
 Embedded systems are price sensitive 
 Hence, use slow and low-cost memory devices to get substantial savings—essential for 
high-volume applications like digital cameras. 
 Also, reduce the area of the die taken up by the embedded processor; smaller the area used 
by the embedded processor, reduced cost of the design and manufacturing for the end 
product. 
 ARM has incorporated hardware debug technology within the processor so that software 
engineers can view what is happening while the processor is executing code. With greater 
visibility, software engineers can resolve issues faster. 
 The ARM core is not a pure RISC architecture because of the constraints of its primary 
application—the embedded system. In some sense, the strength of the ARM core is that it does not 
take the RISC concept too far. 
Instruction Set for Embedded Systems: 
The ARM instruction set differs from the pure RISC definition in several ways that make the ARM 
instruction set suitable for embedded applications: 
 Variable cycle execution for certain instructions—not every ARM instruction executes in a single 
cycle. For example, load-store-multiple instructions vary in the number of execution cycles 
depending upon the number of registers being transferred. The transfer can occur on sequential 
memory addresses. Code density is also improved since multiple register transfers are common 
operations at the start and end of functions. 

Microcontrollers 
BCS402 
5 
 
 
 Inline barrel shifter leading to more complex instructions—the inline barrel shifter is a hardware 
component that pre processes one of the input registers before it is used by an instruction. This 
expands the capability of many instructions to improve core performance and code density. 
 Thumb 16-bit instruction set—ARM enhanced the processor core by adding a second 16-bit 
instruction set called Thumb that permits the ARM core to execute either 16- or 32-bit 
instructions. The 16-bit instructions improve code density by about 30% over 32-bit fixed-length 
instructions. 
 Conditional execution—an instruction is only executed when a specific condition has been 
satisfied. This feature improves performance and code density by reducing branch instructions. 
 Enhanced instructions—The enhanced digital signal processor (DSP) instructions were added to 
the standard ARM instruction set to support fast 16×16-bit multiplier operations. These 
instructions allow a faster-performing ARM processor. 
These additional features have made the ARM processor one of the most commonly used 32-bit 
embedded processor cores. 
 
EMBEDDED SYSTEM HARDWARE 
Explain embedded system hardware. 
Explain hardware components of ARM-based embedded device. 
Explain AMBA bus technology/ architecture/ protocol. 
Explain ARM memory controller and interrupt controller 
Embedded systems can control many different devices, from small sensors found on a production line, to 
the real-time control systems used on a NASA space probe. All these devices use a combination of 
software and hardware components. 
The following Figure shows a typical embedded device based on an ARM core. Each box represents a 
feature or function. The lines connecting the boxes are the buses carrying data. 
We can separate the device into four main hardware components: 
1. The ARM processor controls the embedded device. Different versions of the ARM processor are 
available to suit the desired operating characteristics. An ARM processor comprises a core (the 
execution engine that processes instructions and manipulates data) plus the surrounding components 
(memory and cache) that interface it with a bus. 
2. Controllers coordinate important functional blocks of the system. Two commonly found 
controllers are interrupt and memory controllers. 

Microcontrollers 
BCS402 
6 
 
 
3. The peripherals provide all the input-output capability external to the chip and are responsible for 
the uniqueness of the embedded device. 
4. A bus is used to communicate between different parts of the device. 
 
Figure: An ARM-based Embedded Device, a Microcontroller 
 
ARM Bus Technology: 
Embedded devices use an on-chip bus that is internal to the chip and that allows different peripheral 
devices to be interconnected with an ARM core. 
There are two different classes of devices attached to the bus: 
1. The ARM processor core is a bus master—a logical device capable of initiating a data transfer with 
another device across the same bus. 
2. Peripherals tend to be bus slaves—logical devices capable only of responding to a transfer request 
from a bus master device. 
A bus has two architecture levels: 
A physical level—covers the electrical characteristics and bus width (16, 32, or 64 bits). 
The protocol—the logical rules that govern the communication between the processor and a peripheral. 
 
AMBA Bus Protocol: 
 The Advanced Microcontroller Bus Architecture (AMBA) was introduced in 1996 and has been 
widely adopted as the on-chip bus architecture used for ARM processors. 
 The first AMBA buses introduced were the ARM System Bus (ASB) and the ARM Peripheral Bus 
(APB). Later ARM introduced another bus design, called the ARM High Performance Bus (AHB). 

Microcontrollers 
BCS402 
7 
 
 
 Using AMBA, peripheral designers can reuse the same design on multiple projects. A peripheral 
can simply be bolted onto the on-chip bus without having to redesign an interface for each 
different processor architecture. This plug-and-play interface for hardware developers improves 
availability and time to market. 
 AHB provides higher data throughput than ASB because it is based on a centralized multiplexed 
bus scheme rather than the ASB bidirectional bus design. This change allows the AHB bus to run 
at higher clock speeds. 
 ARM has introduced two variations on the AHB bus: Multi-layer AHB and AHB-Lite. 
 The Multi-layer AHB bus allows multiple active bus masters. 
 AHB-Lite is a subset of the AHB bus and it is limited to a single bus master. 
 The example device shown in the above Figure has three buses: 
 An AHB bus for the high- performance peripherals 
 An APB bus for the slower peripherals 
 A third bus for external peripherals, proprietary to this device. 
Web link: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Advanced_Microcontroller_Bus_Architecture 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7Vl9JrGgNwk 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QQY-h0HGHnI 
Memory: 
An embedded system has to have some form of memory to store and execute code. You have to compare 
price, performance, and power consumption when deciding upon specific memory characteristics, such as 
hierarchy, width, and type. 
Hierarchy: All computer systems have memory arranged in some form of hierarchy. The following Figure 
shows the memory trade-offs: the fastest memory cache is physically located nearer the ARM processor 
core and the slowest secondary memory is set further away. Generally the closer memory is to the 
processor core, the more it costs and the smaller its capacity. 
 

Microcontrollers 
BCS402 
8 
 
 
 The cache is placed between main memory and the core. It is used to speed up data transfer 
between the processor and main memory. A cache provides an overall increase in performance but 
with a loss of predictable execution time. Although the cache increases the general performance of 
the system, it does not help real-time system response. 
 The main memory is large—around 256 KB to 256 MB (or even greater), depending on the 
application—and is generally stored in separate chips. Load and store instructions access the main 
memory unless the values have been stored in the cache for fast access. 
 Secondary storage is the largest and slowest form of memory. Hard disk drives and CD-ROM 
drives are examples of secondary storage. 
 Width: The memory width is the number of bits the memory returns on each access—typically 8, 
16, 32, or 64 bits. 
 The memory width has a direct effect on the overall performance and cost ratio. Lower bit 
memories are less expensive, but reduce the system performance. 
 The following Table summarizes theoretical cycle times on an ARM processor using different 
memory width devices. 
 
Types: There are many different types of memory: 
 Read-only memory (ROM) is the least flexible of all memory types because it contains an image 
that is permanently set at production time and cannot be reprogrammed. 
 ROMs are used in high-volume devices that require no updates or corrections. Many devices 
also use a ROM to hold boot code. 
 Flash ROM can be written to as well as read, but it is slow to write so you shouldn‘t use it for 
holding dynamic data. 
 Its main use is for holding the device firmware or storing long-term data that needs to be 
preserved after power is off. The erasing and writing of flash ROM are completely software 
controlled with no additional hardware circuitry required, which reduces the manufacturing 
costs. 
 Dynamic random access memory (DRAM) is the most commonly used RAM for devices. It has 
the lowest cost per megabyte compared with other types of RAM. DRAM is dynamic—it needs to 

Microcontrollers 
BCS402 
9 
 
 
have its storage cells refreshed and given a new electronic charge every few milliseconds, so you 
need to set up a DRAM controller before using the memory. 
 Static random access memory (SRAM) is faster than the more traditional DRAM, but requires 
more silicon area. SRAM is static—the RAM does not require refreshing. The access time for 
SRAM is considerably shorter than the equivalent DRAM because SRAM does not require a 
pause between data accesses. But cost of SRAM is high. 
 Synchronous dynamic random access memory (SDRAM) is one of many subcategories of 
DRAM. It can run at much higher clock speeds than conventional memory. SDRAM synchronizes 
itself with the processor bus, because it is clocked. Internally the data is fetched from memory 
cells, pipelined, and finally brought out on the bus in a burst. 
Peripherals: 
 
Embedded systems that interact with the outside world need some form of peripheral device. A peripheral 
device performs input and output functions for the chip by connecting to other devices or sensors that are 
off-chip. 
 Each peripheral device usually performs a single function and may reside on-chip. 
 Peripherals range from a simple serial communication device to a more complex 
802.11wireless device. 
 All ARM peripherals are memory mapped—the programming interface is a set of memory 
addressed registers. The address of these registers is an offset from a specific peripheral base 
address. 
 Controllers are specialized peripherals that implement higher levels of functionality within an 
embedded system. 
 Two important types of controllers are memory controllers and interrupt controllers. 
 
Memory Controllers: Memory controllers connect different types of memory to the processor bus. 
 
 On power-up a memory controller is configured in hardware to allow certain memory devices to 
be active. These memory devices allow the initialization code to be executed. 
Some memory devices must be set up by software; for example, when using DRAM, you first have to set 
up the memory timings and refresh rate before it can be accessed. 
Web link: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aFzhbX4KAXE 

Microcontrollers 
BCS402 
10 
 
 
Interrupt Controllers: When a peripheral or device requires attention, it raises an interrupt to the 
processor. An interrupt controller provides a programmable governing policy that allows software to 
determine which peripheral or device can interrupt the processor at any specific time by setting the 
appropriate bits in the interrupt controller registers. 
There are two types of interrupt controller available for the ARM processor: the standard interrupt 
controller and the vector interrupt controller. 
1. The standard interrupt controller sends an interrupt signal to the processor core when an external device 
requests servicing. It can be programmed to ignore or mask an individual device or set of devices. 
 The interrupt handler determines which device requires servicing by reading a device bitmap 
register in the interrupt controller. 
2. The vector interrupt controller (VIC) is more powerful than the standard interrupt controller, because it 
prioritizes interrupts and simplifies the determination of which device caused the interrupt. 
 Depending on the type, the VIC will either call the standard interrupt exception handler 
 
Web link: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8Umh-E7bi_I 
https://developer.arm.com/ip-products/system-ip/system-controllers/interrupt-controllers 
https://www.embien.com/blog/arm-interrupt-controllers/ 
 
EMBEDDED SYSTEM SOFTWARE 
Explain embedded system software 
Explain ARM software abstraction layers 
Explain four typical software components required to control an embedded device. 
An embedded system needs software to drive it. The following Figure shows four typical software 
components required to control an embedded device. 
 
 
Figure: Software Abstraction Layers Executing on Hardware 

Microcontrollers 
BCS402 
11 
 
 
 The initialization code is the first code executed on the board and is specific to a particular target or 
group of targets. It sets up the minimum parts of the board before handing control over to the 
operating system. 
 The operating system provides an infrastructure to control applications and manage hardware 
system resources. 
 The device drivers provide a consistent software interface to the peripherals on the hardware 
device. 
 An application performs one of the tasks required for a device. o For example, a mobile phone 
might have a diary application. There may be multiple applications running on the same device, 
controlled by the operating system. 
Initialization (Boot) Code: 
 
  Initialization code (or boot code) takes the processor from the reset state to a state where the 
operating system can run. It usually configures the memory controller and processor caches and 
initializes some devices. 
  The initialization code handles a number of administrative tasks prior to handing control over to an 
operating system image. 
 We can group these different tasks into three phases: initial hardware configuration, 
diagnostics, and booting. 
1. Initial hardware configuration involves setting up the target platform, so that it can boot an image. 
The target platform comes up in a standard configuration; but, this configuration normally 
requires modification to satisfy the requirements of the booted image. 
 For example, the memory system normally requires reorganization of the memory map, as 
shown in the following Example. 
Example: Initializing or organizing memory is an important part of the initialization code, because 
many operating systems expect a known memory layout before they can start. 
The below Figure shows memory before and after reorganization. It is common for ARM-based 
embedded systems to provide for memory remapping because it allows the system to start the 
initialization code from ROM at power-up. The initialization code then redefines or remaps the memory 
map to place RAM at address 0x00000000—an important step because then the exception vector table 
can be in RAM and thus can be reprogrammed. 

Microcontrollers 
BCS402 
12 
 
 
 
 
Figure: Memory Remapping 
Web link: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Booting 
http://osnet.cs.nchu.edu.tw/powpoint/Soc_93/Chapter%202%20Embedded%20System 
%20Initialization.pdf 
 
2.  Diagnostics are often embedded in the initialization code. Diagnostic code tests the system by 
exercising the hardware target to check if the target is in working order. It also tracks down standard 
system-related issues. The primary purpose of diagnostic code is fault identification and isolation. 
3. Booting involves loading an image and handing control over to that image. The boot process itself 
can be complicated if the system must boot different operating systems or different versions of the 
same operating system. 
 Booting an image is the final phase, but first you must load the image. Loading an image 
involves anything from copying an entire program including code and data into RAM, to 
just copying a data area containing volatile variables into RAM. Once booted, the system 
hands over control by modifying the program counter to point into the start of the image. 
Web link: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3brOzLJmeek&t=502s 
 
Operating System: 
 The initialization process prepares the hardware for an operating system to take control. An 
operating system organizes the system resources: the peripherals, memory, and processing time.
 ARM processors support over 50 operating systems. We can divide operating systems into two 
main categories: real-time operating systems (RTOSs) and platform operating systems.

Microcontrollers 
BCS402 
13 
 
 
1. RTOSs provide guaranteed response times to events. Different operating systems have different 
amounts of control over the system response time. 
 A hard real-time application requires a guaranteed response to work at all. 
 In contrast, a soft real-time application requires a good response time, but the performance 
degrades more gracefully if the response time overruns. 
2. Platform operating systems require a memory management unit to manage large, non-real-time 
applications and tend to have secondary storage. 
 The Linux operating system is a typical example of a platform operating system. 
 
Applications: 
 The operating system schedules applications—code dedicated to handle a particular task. An 
application implements a processing task; the operating system controls the environment.
 An embedded system can have one active application or several applications running 
simultaneously.
 ARM processors are found in numerous market segments, including networking, auto-motive, 
mobile and consumer devices, mass storage, and imaging.
 ARM processor is found in networking applications like home gateways, DSL modems for high 
speed Internet communication, and 802.11 wireless communications.
 The mobile device segment is the largest application area for ARM processors, because of mobile 
phones.
 ARM processors are also found in mass storage devices such as hard drives and imaging products 
such as inkjet printers—applications that are cost sensitive and high volume.
In contrast, ARM processors are not found in applications that require leading-edge high performance. 
Because these applications tend to be low volume and high cost, ARM has decided not to focus designs 
on these types of applications. 

Microcontrollers 
BCS402 
14 
 
 
ARM CORE 
Explain ARM Core dataflow Model with neat diagram. 
Explain functional units of ARM core. 
A programmer can think of an ARM core as functional units connected by data buses, as shown in the 
following Figure. 
Figure: ARM Core dataflow Model 
The arrows represent the flow of data, the lines represent the buses, and the boxes represent either an 
operation unit or a storage area. 
 Data enters the processor core through the Data bus. The data may be an instruction to execute or 
a data item.
 Figure shows a Von Neumann implementation of the ARM—data items and 
instructions share the same bus. (In contrast, Harvard implementations of the ARM use 
two different buses).

Microcontrollers 
BCS402 
15 
 
 
 The instruction decoder translates instructions before they are executed. Each instruction executed 
belongs to a particular instruction set.
 The ARM processor, like all RISC processors, uses load-store architecture—means it has two 
instruction types for transferring data in and out of the processor:
 load instructions copy data from memory to registers in the core
 store instructions copy data from registers to memory
 There are no data processing instructions that directly manipulate data in memory. Thus, data 
processing is carried out in registers.
 Data items are placed in the register file—a storage bank made up of 32-bit registers.
 Since the ARM core is a 32-bit processor, most instructions treat the registers as holding 
signed or unsigned 32-bit values. The sign extend hardware converts signed 8-bit and 16-bit 
numbers to 32-bit values as they are read from memory and placed in a register.
 ARM instructions typically have two source registers, Rn and Rm, and a single result or 
destination register, Rd. Source operands are read from the register file using the internal buses A 
and B, respectively.
 The ALU (arithmetic logic unit) or MAC (multiply-accumulate unit) takes the register values Rn 
and Rm from the A and B buses and computes a result. Data processing instructions write the 
result in Rd directly to the register file.
 Load and store instructions use the ALU to generate an address to be held in the address register 
and broadcast on the Address bus.
 One important feature of the ARM is that register Rm alternatively can be pre-processed in the 
barrel shifter before it enters the ALU. Together the barrel shifter and ALU can calculate a 
wide range of expressions and addresses.
 After passing through the functional units, the result in Rd is written back to the register file using 
the Result bus.
 For load and store instructions the incrementer updates the address register before the core reads 
or writes the next register value from or to the next sequential memory location.
 The processor continues executing instructions until an exception or interrupt changes the normal 
execution flow.

Microcontrollers 
BCS402 
16 
 
 
REGISTERS 
List and explain ARM general-purpose registers 
Explain purpose every active registers available in user mode. 
General-purpose registers hold either data or an address. They are identified with the letter r prefixed to 
the register number. For example, register 4 is given the label r4. 
The Figure shows the active registers available in user mode. (A protected mode is normally used when 
executing applications). 
The processor can operate in seven different modes.
 All the registers shown are 32 bits in size.
 There are up to 18 active registers:
 16 data registers and 2 processor status registers.
 The data registers visible to the programmer are r0 to r15.
 The ARM processor has three registers assigned to a particular task or special function: r13, r14, 
and r15. They are given with different labels to differentiate them from the other registers.

Microcontrollers 
BCS402 
17 
 
 
 Register r13 is traditionally used as the stack pointer (sp) and stores the head of the stack in 
the current processor mode.
 Register r14 is called the link register (lr) and is where the core puts the return address 
whenever it calls a subroutine.
 Register r15 is the program counter (pc) and contains the address of the next instruction to 
be fetched by the processor.
 In ARM state the registers r0 to r13 are orthogonal—any instruction that you can apply to r0 you 
can equally well apply to any of the other registers.
 In addition to the 16 data registers, there are two program status registers: cpsr (current program 
status register) and spsr (saved program status register).
Web link: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=92fDrKC7R_M&t=34s 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-o0ybJmyT2U&t=162s 
http://www.keil.com/support/man/docs/armasm/armasm_dom1359731128950.htm 
https://developer.arm.com/docs/ddi0087/latest/programmers-model/registers/the-arm-state-register-set 
 
CURRENT PROGRAM STATUS REGISTER 
With neat diagram explain bits of CPSR 
Explain ARM status register with diagram 
List and explain ARM flag bits 
List and explain ARM processor modes and banked registers. 
The ARM core uses the cpsr to monitor and control internal operations. The cpsr is a dedicated 32-bit 
register and resides in the register file. The following Figure shows the basic layout of a generic program 
status register. Note that the shaded parts are reserved for future expansion.  
                                                Figure: A Generic Program Status Register (psr) 

Microcontrollers 
BCS402 
18 
 
 
 
The cpsr is divided into four fields, each 8 bits wide: flags, status, extension, and control. In current 
designs the extension and status fields are reserved for future use. 
 The control field contains the processor mode, state, and interrupt mask bits.
 The flags field contains the condition flags.
Some ARM processor cores have extra bits allocated. For example, the J bit, which can be found in the 
flags field, is only available on Jazelle-enabled processors, which execute 8-bit instructions. 
It is highly probable that future designs will assign extra bits for the monitoring and control of new 
features. 
Processor Modes: 
 The processor mode determines which registers are active and the access rights to the cpsr register 
itself. Each processor mode is either privileged or non-privileged:
 A privileged mode allows full read-write access to the cpsr.
 A non-privileged mode only allows read access to the control field in the cpsr, but still allows 
read-write access to the condition flags.
 There are seven processor modes in total:
 six privileged modes (abort, fast interrupt request, interrupt request, supervisor, system, and 
undefined)
• The processor enters abort mode when there is a failed attempt to access memory. 
• Fast interrupt request and interrupt request modes correspond to the two interrupt levels 
available on the ARM processor. 
• Supervisor mode is the mode that the processor is in after reset and is generally the mode that an 
operating system kernel operates in. 
• System mode is a special version of user mode that allows full read-write access to the cpsr. 
• Undefined mode is used when the processor encounters an instruction that is undefined or not 
supported by the implementation. 
 One non-privileged mode (user). 
• User mode is used for programs and applications. 

Microcontrollers 
BCS402 
19 
 
 
Web link: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-o0ybJmyT2U&t=162s 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ceYtN0B91WM 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-Pl7jeERhfk 
http://www.keil.com/support/man/docs/armasm/armasm_dom1359731126962.htm 
Banked Registers: 
The following Figure shows all 37 registers in the register file. 
 
 Of these, 20 registers are hidden from a program at different times.
 These registers are called banked registers and are identified by the shading in the diagram.
 They are available only when the processor is in a particular mode; for example, abort mode has 
banked registers r13_abt, r14_abt and spsr_abt.
 Banked registers of a particular mode are denoted by an underline character post-fixed to the mode 
mnemonic or _mode.
 Every processor mode except user mode can change mode by writing directly to the mode bits of 
the cpsr.
 All processor modes except system mode have a set of associated banked registers that are a subset 
of the main 16 registers.
 A banked register maps one-to-one onto a user mode register.
 If you change processor mode, a banked register from the new mode will replace an existing 
register.
 For example, when the processor is in the interrupt request mode, the instructions you execute 
still access registers named r13 and r14. However, these registers are the banked registers 
r13_irq and r14_irq. The user mode registers r13_usr and r14_usr are not affected by the 
instruction referencing these registers. A program still has normal access to the other registers 
r0 to r12.
 

Microcontrollers 
BCS402 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure: Complete ARM Register Set 
 
 The processor mode can be changed by a program that writes directly to the cpsr (the processor 
core has to be in privileged mode) or by hardware when the core responds to an exception or 
interrupt.
 The following exceptions and interrupts cause a mode change: reset, interrupt request, fast 
interrupt request, software interrupt, data abort, prefetch abort, and undefined instruction.
 Exceptions and interrupts suspend the normal execution of sequential instructions and jump to a 
Specific
 The following Figure illustrates what happens when an interrupt forces a mode change.

Microcontrollers 
BCS402 
21 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure: Changing Mode on an Exception 
 
 The Figure shows the core changing from user mode to interrupt request mode, which happens 
when an interrupt request occurs due to an external device raising an interrupt to the processor 
core.
 This change causes user registers r13 and r14 to be banked. The user registers are replaced with 
registers r13_irq and r14_irq, respectively.
 Note r14_irq contains the return address and r13_irq contains the stack pointer for interrupt 
request mode.
 The above Figure also shows a new register appearing in interrupt request mode: the saved 
program status register (spsr), which stores the previous mode‘s cpsr. The cpsr being copied into 
spsr_irq.
 To return back to user mode, a special return instruction is used that instructs the core to restore 
the original cpsr from the spsr_irq and bank in the user registers r13 and r14.
 Note that, the spsr can only be modified and read in a privileged mode. There is no spsr available 
in user mode.

Microcontrollers 
BCS402 
22 
 
 
 Another important feature to note is that the cpsr is not copied into the spsr when a mode change 
is forced due to a program writing directly to the cpsr. The saving of the cpsr only occurs when an 
exception or interrupt is raised.
 When power is applied to the core, it starts in supervisor mode, which is privileged. Starting in a 
privileged mode is useful since initialization code can use full access to the cpsr to set up the 
stacks for each of the other modes.
 The following Table lists the various modes and the associated binary patterns. The last column of 
the table gives the bit patterns that represent each of the processor modes in the cpsr.
State and Instruction Sets: 
 The state of the core determines which instruction set is being executed. There are three 
instruction sets:
• ARM 
• Thumb 
• Jazelle. 
 The ARM instruction set is only active when the processor is in ARM state.
 The Thumb instruction set is only active when the processor is in Thumb state. Once in Thumb 
state the processor is executing purely Thumb 16-bit instructions.
 You cannot inter-mingle sequential ARM, Thumb, and Jazelle instructions.
 The Jazelle J and Thumb T bits in the cpsr reflect the state of the processor.
 When both J and T bits are 0, the processor is in ARM state and executes ARM instructions. 
This is the case when power is applied to the processor.
 When the T bit is 1, then the processor is in Thumb state.
 To change states the core executes a specialized branch instruction.

Microcontrollers 
BCS402 
23 
 
 
The following Table compares the ARM and Thumb instruction set features. 
 
 
 
 
 The ARM designers introduced a third instruction set called Jazelle. Jazelle executes 8-bit 
instructions and is a hybrid mix of software and hardware designed to speed up the execution of 
Java byte-codes.
 To execute Java byte-codes, you require the Jazelle technology plus a specially modified version 
of the Java virtual machine.
The following Table gives the Jazelle instruction set features. 
 
 
 
Interrupt Masks: 
 Interrupt masks are used to stop specific interrupt requests from interrupting the processor.
 There are two interrupt request levels available on the ARM processor core—
1. Interrupt Request (IRQ) 
2. Fast Interrupt Request (FIQ). 
 The cpsr has two interrupt mask bits, 7 and 6 (or I and F), which control the masking of IRQ and 
FIQ, respectively.
 The I bit masks IRQ when set to binary 1; and similarly, the F bit masks FIQ when set to binary 1.

Microcontrollers 
BCS402 
24 
 
 
Condition Flags: 
 Condition flags are updated by comparisons and the result of ALU operations that specify the S
instruction suffix. 
 For example, if a SUBS subtract instruction results in a register value of zero, then the Z
Flag in the cpsr is set. This particular subtract instruction specifically updates the cpsr. 
 With processor cores that include the DSP extensions, the Q bit indicates if an overflow or 
saturation has occurred in an enhanced DSP instruction. The flag is ―sticky‖ in the sense that the 
hardware only sets this flag. To clear the flag you need to write to the cpsr directly.
 In Jazelle-enabled processors, the J bit reflects the state of the core; if it is set, the core is in 
Jazelle state. The J bit is not generally usable and is only available on some processor cores. To 
take advantage of Jazelle, extra software has to be licensed from both ARM Limited and Sun 
Microsystems.
 Most ARM instructions can be executed conditionally on the value of the condition flags.
 
The following Table lists the condition flags and a short description on what causes them to be set. 
 
 
These flags are located in the most significant bits in the cpsr. These bits are used for conditional 
execution. The following Figure shows a typical value for the cpsr with both DSP extensions and Jazelle. 
 
Figure: Example: cspr = nzCvqjiFt_SVC 

Microcontrollers 
BCS402 
25 
 
 
 For the condition flags a capital letter shows that the flag has been set. For interrupts a capital 
letter shows that an interrupt is disabled.
 In the cpsr example shown in above Figure, the C flag is the only condition flag set. The rest nzvq 
flags are all clear.
 The processor is in ARM state because neither the Jazelle j nor Thumb t bits are set. The IRQ 
interrupts are enabled, and FIQ interrupts are disabled.
 Finally, you can see from the Figure, the processor is in supervisor (SVC) mode, since the 
mode[4:0] is equal to binary 10011.
Conditional Execution: 
 Conditional execution controls whether or not the core will execute an instruction.
 Prior to execution, the processor compares the condition attribute with the condition flags in the 
cpsr. If they match, then the instruction is executed; otherwise the instruction is ignored.
 The condition attribute is post-fixed to the instruction mnemonic, which is encoded into the 
instruction.
 The following Table lists the conditional execution code mnemonics. When a condition 
mnemonic is not present, the default behaviour is to set it to always (AL) execute.
 
Table: Condition Mnemonics 
Web link: http://www.keil.com/support/man/docs/armasm/armasm_dom1359731161338.htm 
http://www.keil.com/support/man/docs/armasm/armasm_dom1359731160609.htm 

Microcontrollers 
BCS402 
26 
 
 
PIPELINE 
 
Explain concept of pipelining in different versions of ARM 
 
 A pipeline is the mechanism in a RISC processor, which is used to execute instructions.
 Pipeline speeds up execution by fetching the next instruction while other instructions are being 
decoded and executed.
 
 
 
The above Figure shows a three-stage pipeline: 
 Fetch loads an instruction from memory.
 Decode identifies the instruction to be executed.
 Execute processes the instruction and writes the result back to a register. 
The following Figure illustrates pipeline using a simple example.
 
 
 The Figure shows a sequence of three instructions being fetched, decoded, and executed by the 
processor.
 The three instructions are placed into the pipeline sequentially.
 In the first cycle, the core fetches the ADD instruction from memory.
 In the second cycle, the core fetches the SUB instruction and decodes the ADD instruction.

Microcontrollers 
BCS402 
27 
 
 
 In the third cycle, both the SUB and ADD instructions are moved along the pipeline. The 
ADD instruction is executed, the SUB instruction is decoded, and the CMP instruction is 
fetched.
 This procedure is called filling the pipeline.
 The pipeline allows the core to execute an instruction every cycle.
 As the pipeline length increases, the amount of work done at each stage is reduced, which 
allows the processor to attain a higher operating frequency. This in turn increases the 
performance.
 The increased pipeline length also means increased system latency and there can be data 
dependency between certain stages.
 The pipeline design for each ARM family differs. For example, The ARM9 core increases the 
pipeline length to five stages, as shown in Figure.
 
 
 The ARM9 adds a memory and writeback stage, which allows the ARM9 to –
 process on average 1.1 Dhrystone MIPS per MHz
 increase the instruction throughput in ARM9 by around 13% compared with an ARM7.
 The ARM10 increases the pipeline length still further by adding a sixth stage, as shown in the 
following Figure.
 
 
 The ARM10 –
 can process on average 1.3 Dhrystone MIPS per MHz
 have about 34% more throughput than an ARM7 processor core
 but again at a higher latency cost.

Microcontrollers 
BCS402 
28 
 
 
NOTE: Even though the ARM9 and ARM10 pipelines are different, they still use the same pipeline 
executing characteristics as an ARM7. Hence, code written for the ARM7 will execute on an ARM9 or 
ARM10. 
Pipeline Executing Characteristics: 
 The ARM pipeline will not process an instruction, until it passes completely through the execute 
stage.
 For example, an ARM7 pipeline (with three stages) has executed an instruction only when the 
fourth instruction is fetched.
The following Figure shows an instruction sequence on an ARM7 pipeline. 
 
 The MSR instruction is used to enable IRQ interrupts, which only occurs once the MSR 
instruction completes the execute stage of the pipeline. It clears the I bit in the cpsr to enable the 
IRQ
 Once the ADD instruction enters the execute stage of the pipeline, IRQ interrupts are enabled.
 
The following Figure illustrates the use of the pipeline and the program counter pc. 

Microcontrollers 
BCS402 
29 
 
 
 
 
 In the execute stage, the pc always points to the address of the instruction plus 8 bytes. In other 
words, the pc always points to the address of the instruction being executed plus two instructions 
ahead.
 Note when the processor is in Thumb state the pc is the instruction address plus 4.
 There are three other characteristics of the pipeline.
 First, the execution of a branch instruction or branching by the direct modification of the 
pc causes the ARM core to flush its pipeline.
 Second, ARM10 uses branch prediction, which reduces the effect of a pipeline flush by 
predicting possible branches and loading the new branch address prior to the execution of 
the instruction.
 Third, an instruction in the execute stage will complete even though an interrupt has been 
raised. Other instructions in the pipeline will be abandoned, and the processor will start 
filling the pipeline.
Web link: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7vv8MzepJlU 
 
EXCEPTIONS, INTERRUPTS AND THE VECTOR TABLE 
Explain when ARM processor enters different modes? 
How exceptions are handles in ARM? 
 When an exception or interrupt occurs, the processor sets the pc to a specific memory address. 
The address is within a special address range called the vector table.
 The entries in the vector table are instructions that branch to specific routines designed to 
handle a particular exception or interrupt.
 The memory map address 0x00000000 (or in some processors starting at the offset 
0xffff0000) is reserved for the vector table, a set of 32-bit words.

Microcontrollers 
BCS402 
30 
 
 
 When an exception or interrupt occurs, the processor suspends normal execution and starts 
loading instructions from the exception vector table (see the following Table).
 
 
 Each vector table entry contains a form of branch instruction pointing to the start of a specific 
routine:
 Reset vector is the location of the first instruction executed by the processor when power is 
applied. This instruction branches to the initialization code.
 Undefined instruction vector is used when the processor cannot decode an instruction.
 Software interrupt vector is called when you execute a SWI instruction. The SWI 
instruction is frequently used as the mechanism to invoke an operating system routine.
 Prefetch abort vector occurs when the processor attempts to fetch an instruction from an 
address without the correct access permissions. The actual abort occurs in the decode 
stage.
 Data abort vector is similar to a prefetch abort, but is raised when an instruction attempts 
to access data memory without the correct access permissions.
 Interrupt request vector is used by external hardware to interrupt the normal execution 
flow of the processor. It can only be raised if IRQs are not masked in the cpsr.
 Fast interrupt request vector is similar to the interrupt request, but is reserved for 
hardware requiring faster response times. It can only be raised if FIQs are not masked in 
the cpsr.
Web link: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uFBNf7F3l60&t=1s 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nGbVILRkmaw 

Microcontrollers 
BCS402 
31 
 
 
CORE EXTENSIONS 
Write a short note on Arm core extensions. 
Explain Cache and tightly coupled memory techniques. 
Explain memory management unit in ARM. 
Explain three different types of memory management hardware of ARM core. 
Write a short note on coprocessor of ARM. 
 Core extensions are the standard hardware components placed next to the ARM core.
 They improve performance, manage resources, and provide extra functionality and are designed to 
provide flexibility in handling particular applications.
Each ARM family has different extensions available. 
There are three hardware extensions: 
1. Cache and tightly coupled memory, 
2. Memory management, 
3. Coprocessor interface. 
 
Cache and Tightly Coupled Memory: 
 The cache is a block of fast memory placed between main memory and the core. It allows for 
more efficient fetches from some memory types. With a cache the processor core can run for the 
majority of the time without having to wait for data from slow external memory. 
 Most ARM-based embedded systems use a single-level cache internal to the processor. 
 ARM has two forms of cache. The first is found attached to the Von Neumann–style cores. It 
combines both data and instruction into a single unified cache, as shown in the following Figure. 
 

Microcontrollers 
BCS402 
32 
 
 
 The second form, attached to the Harvard-style cores, has separate caches for data and 
instruction, as shown in the following Figure. 
 A cache provides an overall increase in performance, but at the expense of predictable 
execution. But the real-time systems require the code execution to be deterministic— the time 
taken for loading and storing instructions or data must be predictable. 
 This is achieved using a form of memory called tightly coupled memory (TCM). TCM is fast 
SRAM located close to the core and guarantees the clock cycles required to fetch instructions 
or data. 
 TCMs appear as memory in the address map and can be accessed as fast memory. 
By combining both technologies, ARM processors can have both improved performance and predictable 
real-time response. The following Figure shows an example core with a combination of caches and 
TCMs. 

Microcontrollers 
BCS402 
33 
 
 
 
 
Web link: http://infocenter.arm.com/help/topic/com.arm.doc.dui0056d/Cabbfgc8.html 
 
Memory Management: 
 
 Embedded systems often use multiple memory devices. It is usually necessary to have a method to 
organize these devices and protect the system from applications trying to make inappropriate 
accesses to hardware. This is achieved with the assistance of memory management hardware. 
 ARM cores have three different types of memory management hardware— 
 no extensions providing no protection 
 a memory protection unit (MPU) providing limited protection 
 a memory management unit (MMU) providing full protection 
 Non protected memory is fixed and provides very little flexibility. It is normally used for small, 
simple embedded systems that require no protection from rogue applications. 
 MPUs employ a simple system that uses a limited number of memory regions. These regions are 
controlled with a set of special coprocessor registers, and each region is defined with specific 
access permissions. This type of memory management is used for systems that require memory 
protection but don‘t have a complex memory map. 
 MMUs are the most comprehensive memory management hardware available on the ARM. The 
MMU uses a set of translation tables to provide fine-grained control over memory. These tables 
are stored in main memory and provide a virtual-to-physical address map as well as access 
permissions. MMUs are designed for more sophisticated platform operating systems that support 
multitasking. 

Microcontrollers 
BCS402 
34 
 
 
Web link: https://developer.arm.com/architectures/learn-the-architecture/memory- 
management/the-memory-management-unit-mmu 
Coprocessors: 
 
 Coprocessors can be attached to the ARM processor. A coprocessor extends the processing 
features of a core by extending the instruction set or by providing configuration registers. More 
than one coprocessor can be added to the ARM core via the coprocessor interface. 
 The coprocessor can be accessed through a group of dedicated ARM instructions that provide a 
load-store type interface. 
 For example, coprocessor 15: The ARM processor uses coprocessor 15 registers to 
control the cache, TCMs, and memory management. 
 The coprocessor can also extend the instruction set by providing a specialized group of new 
instructions. 
 For example, there are a set of specialized instructions that can be added to the 
standard ARM instruction set to process vector floating-point (VFP) operations. 
 These new instructions are processed in the decode stage of the ARM pipeline. 
 If the decode stage sees a coprocessor instruction, then it offers it to the relevant 
coprocessor. 
 If the coprocessor is not present or doesn‘t recognize the instruction, then the ARM takes an undefined 
instruction exception, which allows you to emulate the behavior of the coprocessor in software. 
