 
 
 
MODULE 3: INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS, PATENTS AND 
PROCESS OF PATENTING 
Syllabus 
 
Introduction to Intellectual Property: Role of IP in the Economic and Cultural Development of 
the Society, IP Governance, IP as a Global Indicator of Innovation, Origin of IP, History of IP in 
India, Major Amendments in IP Laws and Acts in India. 
 
Patents: Conditions for Obtaining a Patent Protection, To Patent or Not to Patent an Invention, 
Rights Associated with Patents, Enforcement of Patent Rights, Inventions, and Eligible for 
Patenting, Non-Patentable Matters, Patent Infringements, Avoid Public Disclosure of an 
Invention before Patenting. 
 
Process of Patenting: Prior Art Search, Choice of Application to be Filed, Patent Application 
Forms, Jurisdiction of Filing Patent Application, Publication, Pre-grant Opposition, Examination, 
Grant of a Patent, Validity of Patent Protection, Post-grant Opposition, Commercialization of a 
Patent, Need for a Patent Attorney/Agent, Can a Worldwide Patent be Obtained, Do I Need First 
to File a Patent in India, Patent Related Forms, Fee Structure, Types of Patent Applications, 
Commonly Used Terms in Patenting, National Bodies Dealing with Patent Affairs, Utility 
Models 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 
 
 Intellectual Property (IP) is the terminology attributed to intangible assets having 
commercial value, and arising from human intelligence, creativity, and imagination, but 
typically lacking physical form. 
 Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) is the privileges accorded to the creator/inventor (of IP) 
in conformance with the laws. These rights are given to the creator/inventor in exchange 
for revealing the process of creation/invention in the public domain. The inventor is 
conferred with the special rights to use, sell, distribute, offering for sale and restricting 
others from using the invention without his prior permission 
    Page 1
https://vtucod e.in
RM& IPR– BRMK557

 
 
 
 Broadly, IP comprises of two branches i.e. Copyrights and Related Rights and Industrial 
Property Rights. 
o Copyrights and Related Rights refer to the creative expressions in the fields of 
literature and art, such as books, publications, architecture, music, wood/stone 
carvings, 
pictures, 
portrays 
sculptures, 
films 
and 
computer-based 
software‘s/databases. 
o The Industrial Property Rights refer to the Patents, Trademarks, Trade Services, 
Industrial Designs and Geographical Indications 
 Copyright: Copyright is the right bestowed on the owner or creator in relation to 
publication, and distribution of a piece of writing, music, picture or related works. 
Copyright also applies to technical contents such as software, datasheets and related 
documents. 
 Patents: A patent is a legal record that bestows the holder the exclusive right over an 
invention as per the claims, in a limited geographical domain and for a limited duration 
by thwarting possible interested parties from any form of manufacture, use or sale of the 
product or outcome of the invention 
 Trademarks: A trademark is a sign that suitably differentiates the owner‘s goods or 
services from those of others 
 Trade services: Any services in relation to trade or any trade related financing, lending 
or other financial accommodation provided(or to be provided) by the bank, including but 
not limited to issuance/amendment of letter of credit, document arrival under letter of 
credit, application for negotiation and inquiries etc., 
 Industrial Designs: An industrial design protection is related to certain specific 
ornamental shapes associated with products whose duplication the owner may wish to 
prevent 
 Geographical Indications: A geographical indication (GI) is a name or sign used on 
products which corresponds to a specific geographical location or origin. Items that meet 
geographical origin and quality standards may be endorsed with a government-issued 
stamp which acts as official certification of the origins and standards of the product. 
    Page 2
https://vtucod e.in
RM& IPR– BRMK557

 
 
 
ROLE OF IP IN THE ECONOMIC AND CULTURAL DEVELOPMENT OF THE 
SOCIETY 
 Creativity being the keystone of progress, no civilized society can afford to ignore the 
basic requirement of encouraging the same. The economic and social development of a 
society is largely dependent on creativity. 
 The protection provided by the IPR to the creators/innovators is in fact an act of 
incentivization for encouraging them to create more and motivates others to create new. 
 However, if IPR is practiced rigidly, it may have a negative impact on the progress of 
society. For example, compliance with the Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property 
Rights (TRIPS) Agreement has affected the farming community as they are unable to 
store seeds for the next crop. Multinational companies regulate the price of seeds, which 
is generally beyond the reach of a majority of the farmers. 
 To circumvent the negative impact of IPR, certain laws, exceptions and limitations 
associated with IPR have been enacted to maintain a balance between the interests of the 
creators/inventors and the community. 
 For example, farmers rights under the Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers Rights 
(PVP&FR) Act, 2001 entitles them to many privileges, such as Rights on seeds provides 
rights to the farmers to save seeds, use seeds and share, exchange or sell seeds to other 
farmers. 
 Right to protection against accusations of infringement protects the farmers from 
infringement and other legal accusation levied upon them due to his legal ignorance in 
using other‗s plant varieties. 
 The use of copyrighted material for education and religious ceremonies is exempted from 
the operation of the rights granted in the Copyright Act. 
 Similarly, a patent can be revoked in favor of compulsory licensing by the government 
during an emergency or a natural calamity. 
 In addition, if an invention/creation is not in the interest of society, it is not registered by 
the government for grant of any rights associated with IP. For example, cloning of human 
embryos is banned for IP protection, and so is the creation of super microbial pathogens, 
which can play havoc with human lives. 
    Page 3
https://vtucod e.in
RM& IPR– BRMK557

 
 
 
IP GOVERNANCE 
 
 Since IP is an integral component of human society, each and every nation has dedicated 
agencies for laying out the guidelines, implementation and enforcement of IP related 
matters. 
 In India, many organizations/agencies deal with various aspects of IP. The governance of 
all categories of IP, except the Plant Variety and Farmers Rights Act, is carried out by the 
Department for Promotion of Industry & Internal Trade (DPIIT) under the aegis of 
Ministry of Commerce and Industry, Govt. of India. 
 There are a few other dedicated organizations/departments established by the government 
to 
promote 
patent-ecosystem 
(patent 
awareness, 
patent 
filing 
and 
patent 
commercialization) in India e.g. Technology Information Forecasting and Assessment 
Council (TIFAC), National Research Development Corporation (NRDC) and Cell for 
IPR Promotion and Management (CIPAM), etc. 
 In order to create a hassle-free exchange of IP related activities amongst all the nations, it 
is imperative to have minimum standards of rules and regulations pertaining to all aspects 
of IP including rights, empowerment, exceptions, etc. 
 To achieve this goal, the United Nations (UN) has established an organization called the 
World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO). 
 This agency is at the forefront of imparting knowledge about IP and governs international 
filing and registration of IP through various Conventions and Treaties like Paris 
Conventions, Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT), Rome Convention, Berne Convention, 
etc. 
 
IP AS A GLOBAL INDICATOR OF INNOVATION 
 
 IP, especially patents, is considered as one of the important cogs in assessing the 
innovation index of a nation. 
 The global ranking organizations always have IP or a subset of IP as one of the 
parameters for understanding and grading the Science, Technology and Innovation (STI) 
ecosystem of a nation. 
    Page 4
https://vtucod e.in
RM& IPR– BRMK557

 
 
 
 For example, the Scimago (publically available online portal which ranks journals and 
countries based on the data taken from Scopus) 2020 report ranked India at 4th position 
in the parameter of a number of Research Publications and 50th position in the parameter 
of Intellectual Property Rights. 
 The global ranking can be improved by sensitizing the teaching and scientific 
communities about the importance of IP and creating infrastructure for the same in the 
institutes of higher learning. 
 
ORIGIN OF IP 
 
 Though there is no official record of the origin of IP, it is believed that a rudimentary 
form of IP was being practiced around 500 Before the Common Era (BCE) in Sybaris, a 
state of Greece. 
 The natives of Sybaris were granted a year‗s protection for using their intellect to create 
 
any new improvement in luxury. 
 A practical and pragmatic approach for IP governance started taking shape in medieval 
Europe. In 1623, Britain passed an Intellectual Property Legislation which entitled guilds 
(association of artisans or merchants) to create innovations and bring them to market for 
trade purposes. 
 However, this legislation brought a lot of resentment amongst the public, and thus was 
replaced by the Statute of Monopolies‗, which gave the rights to the original 
creator/inventor for 14 years. Another legislation, Statute of Anne‗, was passed by the 
British parliament in 1710. 
 This legislation aimed at strengthening copyrights by providing rights to the authors for 
recreation and distribution of their work. The work could also be renewed for another 14 
years. 
 By the end of the 18th century and the beginning of the 19th century, almost every 
country started laying down IP legislation to protect their novel inventions and creations. 
    Page 5
https://vtucod e.in
RM& IPR– BRMK557

 
 
 
HISTORY OF IP IN INDIA 
 
Patents 
 
 The history of the Indian patent system dates back to the pre independence era of British 
rule. The first patent related legislation in India was Act VI of 1856, adapted from the 
British Patent Law of 1852. The objective of this legislation was to encourage the 
inventions of new and useful manufactures. 
 At the beginning of the 20th century, all the earlier Acts related to inventions and designs 
were done away with the introduction of ―The Indian Patents and Designs Act‖ 1911 (Act 
II of 1911). 
 As per this Act, the governance of patents was placed under the management of the 
Controller of Patents. In the next three decades, many amendments were introduced for 
reciprocal arrangements with other countries for securing priority dates. These 
amendments dealt with; 
o Use of invention by the government 
o Patent of Addition 
o Enhancing the term of the patent from 14 years to 16 years. 
o Filing of Provisional Application and submission of Complete Application 
within 9 months from the date of filing the application. 
 Keeping the national interest in mind, recommendations were made in 1949 as a 
modification to existing ―The Indian Patents and Designs Act‖. And those 
recommendations are as follows 
o Misuse of patents rights needs to be prevented. 
o There must be a clear indication in the Act that food, medicine and surgical and 
curative devices should be made available to the masses at the cheapest rate by 
giving reasonable compensation to the owner of the patent. 
o Amendments in Sections 22, 23 and 23A of the Patent and Design Act, 1911 on 
the lines of the UK Patent Act. 
 These recommendations were introduced in the Act XXXII of 1950. 
 Two years later, another amendment (Act LXX of 1952) was made to provide 
compulsory licensing of patents related to food, drugs and chemicals killing insects and 
    Page 6
https://vtucod e.in
RM& IPR– BRMK557

 
 
 
microbes. Based on these amendments, a bill was presented in the parliament in 1953 but 
was rejected. 
 In 1957 a committee was constituted and the committee submitted its report to the 
government in 1959. It comprised of two segments addressing 
o General aspects of the patent laws, and 
o Bill rejected back in 1953. 
 The revised patent legislation was submitted to the Lok Sabha in 1965. After many 
hiccups, clarifications and modifications the Patents Act, 1970 
 In 1999, The Patents (Amendment) Act, 1999 was introduced providing for the filing of 
applications for ‗Product Patents‗ in the areas of drugs, pharmaceuticals and 
agrochemicals 
 The new Patent Act also included provisions for the grant of Exclusive Market Rights 
(EMRs) for the distribution and sale of pharma products on fulfillment of certain 
conditions. The second amendment to the 1970 Act was made through the Patents 
(Amendment) Act, 2002 (Act 38 of 2002). This Act introduced new Patent Rules, 2003, 
thus replacing the earlier Patents Rules, 1972. 
 With the rapidly changing scenario of IPR at a global level, a need was felt to further 
amend the Patent Act, 1970. The highlight of the Patents (Amendments) Act 2005 were: 
o Product patent for inventions in all fields of technology. 
o New forms of known substances excluded to prevent ever greening of the patent. 
o Rationalization of the opposition procedure. 
o Introduction of pre-grant opposition by representation. 
o Introduction of post-grant opposition. 
o Compulsory license for export purposes. 
o Compulsory license for manufacture. 
o Extension of grace period from 6 months to 12 months for filing a patent, if 
published in government exhibition. 
 
Copyrights and related rights 
 
 The concept of copyrights started way back in the 15th century. However, the actual need 
for copyrights law was felt only after the invention of printers and copiers. 
    Page 7
https://vtucod e.in
RM& IPR– BRMK557

 
 
 
 Before the invention of printers, writing could be created only once. It was highly 
laborious and the risk of errors was involved in the manual process of copying by a 
scribe. 
 The evolution of copyrights law in India occurred in three phases. First, two phases were 
enacted during the British Raj. 
o In the first phase, the concept of copyrights was introduced in 1847 through an 
enactment during the East India Company‗s regime. The term of copyrights was 
for the lifetime of the author plus seven years after death. The registration of 
copyright was mandatory for the enforcement of rights under the Act. The 
government could grant a compulsory license to publish a book if the owner of 
the copyright, upon the death of the author, refused to allow its publication. 
o In the second phase Indian legislature, under the British Raj, enacted the 
Copyright Act of 1914 based on the Imperial Copyright Act (1911) of the UK. An 
Act for criminal sanction for an infringement was introduced. 
o The third phase of the copyrights regime was witnessed post-independence. The 
Copyright Act 1957 was enacted, superseding the Indian Copyright Act, 1914, in 
order to suit the provisions of the Berne Convention (1886). 
 The 1957 Act has been amended six times (1983, 1984, 1992, 1994 and 1999, 2012), to 
comply with WIPO Copyright Treaty (WCT), 1996 and WIPO Performances and 
Phonograms Treaty (WPPT), 1996. 
 India is an active member of nearly all significant international Conventions/Treaties 
related to Copyright Law e.g. the Berne Convention as modified in Paris in 1971, the 
Universal Copyright Convention (1951), the Rome Convention (1961), WCT, WPPT and 
(TRIPS, 1995). 
 
Trademarks 
 
 The first statutory law related to Trademarks (TM) in India was the Trade Marks Act, 
1940, which was carved out from the Trade Marks Act, 1938 of the UK. 
 It was followed by the incorporation of provisions of TM stated in the Indian Penal Code, 
Criminal Procedure Code and the Sea Customs Act. 
    Page 8
https://vtucod e.in
RM& IPR– BRMK557

 
 
 
 Later on, Trade Marks Act, 1940 was rechristened as Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 
1958. 
 Nearly four decades later, this Act was repealed by the Trade Marks Act, 1999. The need 
for this occurred to comply with the provisions of the TRIPS. It is the current governing 
law related to register TM. 
 
Geographical Indications 
 
 India, as a member of WTO, enacted the Geographical Indications of Goods (Registration 
and Protection) Act, 1999. 
 It came into force with effect from 15th September 2003. Geographical Indicators have 
been defined under Article 22 (1) of the WTO Agreement on TRIPS. 
 
Industrial Design 
 
 The need to protect Industrial Designs (ID) was recognized in the 18th century and the 
Indian legislation enacted the ―Patterns and Designs Act‖ in 1872 for the first time. The 
Act was enacted to protect the rights over the creation of the designs and novel patterns 
by the inventors. 
 The Act was replaced by the British Patents and Designs Act in 1907, which later became 
the basis for the Indian Patents and Designs Act, 1911. 
 In 1970, a separate Act was enacted for the patent, i.e. the Patent Act, 1970. The Indian 
Patents and Designs Act, 1911, remained in force for designs only. 
 Finally, in the year 2000, a dedicated Act for the ID was passed, which came into force in 
2001. 
 
Semiconductor Integrated Circuits and Layout designs 
 
 In the 21st century, Information Technology (IT) has revolutionized the economic and 
societal growth of the world economy. 
 The rapid and tremendous scientific advancements in the field of IT resulted in the 
creation of a new class of IP called the Layout-Design of the Semiconductor Integrated 
Circuits. Various organizations, including WTO and TRIPS Agreement laid down rules 
    Page 9
https://vtucod e.in
RM& IPR– BRMK557

 
 
 
and regulations regarding the protection of Semiconductor Integrated Circuits and Layout 
Designs (SICLD) 
 India being a member of the WTO also passed an Act called the SICLD Act, 2000. This 
Act is TRIPS compliant and fulfils the conditions of the TRIPS agreement (Articles. 35 
to 38) concerning the protection of SICLD. 
 
Plant varieties 
 
 Till 1970s, not much emphasis was laid on patentable matter originating from animals 
and plants. However, microbes and microbial products/processes were patentable. 
 To include all kinds of biological materials under the ambit of patent laws, a decision to 
enact a new sui generis law under the International Convention for the Protection of New 
Varieties of Plants (UPOV, 1978) and UPOV, 1991 was taken. 
 These decisions were taken to address environmental and public interest concerns. 
 The Indian Patents Act, 1970 excludes ―plants and animals in whole or any part thereof 
other than microorganisms‖ from patentability. 
 To comply with the mandate of Article 27.3 (b) of TRIPS, India adopted the Protection of 
Plant Varieties and Farmers Rights (PPV&FR) Act, 2001 as a sui generis regime 
protecting not only new plant varieties but also farmer‘s rights. 
 
Biodiversity conservation 
 
 In 1927 the ―Indian Forest Act‖ and later on the ―Wildlife Protection Act‖ 1972 was 
enacted to provide legal protection to biodiversity. 
 In 1988, the ―National Forest Policy‖ was passed, which brought revolutionary changes 
in the conservation and management of biodiversity. 
 The Acts and policies in force to protect the environment and biodiversity in India 
include Mining and Mineral Development Regulation Act, 1957; Water (prevention and 
control of pollution) Act, 1974; Forest Conservation Act, 1980; Biological Diversity Act, 
2002; Scheduled Tribes and other Traditional Forest Dwellers (recognition of rights) Act, 
2006; National Biodiversity Action Plan, 2009; National Environment Policy, 2006 and a 
few more. 
  Page 10
https://vtucod e.in
RM& IPR– BRMK557

 
 
 
MAJOR AMENDMENTS IN IP LAWS AND ACTS IN INDIA 
 
In order to fill the gaps existing in the IP Laws and Acts and also to introduce new 
guidelines/directions based on the current scenario (socially and politically), each nation keeps 
on updating the concerned IP Laws and Acts. Some of the salient amendments made in Indian 
Laws and Acts on IPR are mentioned below: 
Sl. No 
Year 
Historical Proceedings 
PATENTS 
1 
1856 
 
The Act VI of 1856 on the protection of inventions based on the 
British Patent Law of 1852. 
2 
1859 
 Rights renamed as "Exclusive Privileges" 
 Time for the priority increased from 6 months to 12 months. 
3 
1883 
 The Patterns and Designs Protection Act 
 Introduction of novelty in the invention. 
 A grace period of 6 months for the disclosure of the invention. 
4 
1911 
 Renamed as "The Indian Patent and Design Act" and brought under 
the management of "Controller of Patents" 
5 
1930 
 Introduction of Patent of Addition. 
 Government can use the invention if required. 
 The term of patent protection increased from 14 to 16 years. 
6 
1945 
 Filing of the provisional specification to secure the priority date. 
 Provision of submitting complete specifications within 9 months. 
7 
1949 
 Dedicated Committee formed under the leadership of Justice Bakshi 
Tek Chand for reviewing patent system as per the national 
Environment. 
8 
1950 
 A working statement needs to be submitted at the Patent Office 
 Endorsement of the Patents with the words "License of Right‖ on the 
application made by the government so that the Controller could grant 
The license. 
9 
1952 
 Provision of "Compulsory License" in the areas of food, medicine and 
insecticide germicide. 
 Process for producing substance or any invention relating to surgical 
  Page 11
https://vtucod e.in
RM& IPR– BRMK557

 
 
 
 
or curative devices. 
10 
1965 
 After incorporation of the recommendation submitted by the 
committee formed in 1949, a new bill was introduced in Lok Sabha 
but was not cleared. 
11 
1967 
 Again submitted to Parliamentary Committee. 
 1911 Act remained applicable for Designs. 
12 
1970 
 The Patent Act, 1970 passed by the Parliament Committee. 
13 
1972 
 The Patent Act, 1970 came into force with the introduction of patent 
rules. 
14 
1995 
 TRIPS Agreement was signed by India and got transition period 1995- 
2005 to make domestic laws compatible with TRIPS. 
15 
1999 
 Introducing the provisions for receiving the applications for the 
product patent in the field of pharmaceuticals and agro-chemicals 
(mail box)*. 
 Provisions for the grant of EMRs for distribution and sale of pharma 
products on fulfillment of certain conditions. 
 Grant of EMR subject to certain conditions. After the amendments 
(1999) the product patents related to the pharmaceuticals and 
agrochemicals were kept on hold for examination till 2005. It is called 
a mailbox or black box. 
16 
2002 
 The uniform 20-year term of the patent for all inventions. 
 Disclosure of source and geographical origin of biological material 
made compulsory. 
 Establishment of Appellate Board. 
 Compulsory License provisions strengthened. 
17 
2003 
 The Patents Rules, 2003 were introduced. 
18 
2005 
 Product patent for inventions in all fields of technology including 
food, drug, chemicals and microorganisms. 
 New forms of known substances excluded in order to prevent the ever- 
greening of the patent. 
 Introduction of the pre-grant opposition. 
  Page 12
https://vtucod e.in
RM& IPR– BRMK557

 
 
 
 
 Introduction of post-grant opposition. 
 Extension of grace period to 12 months. 
COPYRIGHTS AND RELATED RIGHTS 
1 
1847 
 The concept of Copyrights in India was introduced. 
 Validity - Lifetime+7 years but not more than 42 years in total. 
2 
1914 
 Copyright Act, 1914 was introduced based on the 
 Imperial Copyright Act, 1911 of UK. 
3 
1957 
 Copyright Act, 1914 was replaced with Copyright Act, 1957 with 
minor modifications 
4 
1984 
 Penalty on second and subsequent conviction 
5 
1994 
 Registration of Copyright Society made mandatory 
6 
2012 
 To comply with international Treaties for copyrights protection in the 
digital environment. 
 Right to receive royalties for authors and music composers. 
 Exception of copyrights for physically disabled persons to access any 
work. 
7 
2013 
 Copyrights Rules, 2013 introduced. 
TRADEMARKS 
1 
1940 
 Trademarks Registry established in India. 
2 
1958 
 The Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958 enacted as per TRIPS 
Agreement. 
3 
1999 
 Amended to avoid duplicity and ensure securing proprietors trade and 
goodwill 
4 
2002 
 Trademarks Rules introduced. 
5 
2010 
 Amended to comply with Madrid Protocol for international filing. 
 Provision for filing opposition of the registration within 4 months.\ 
6 
2013 
 Trademarks Rules introduced. 
GEOGRAPHICAL INDICATIONS 
1 
1999 
 Being a member of the World Trade Organization (TRIPS), GI of 
goods (Registration and Protection) Act was introduced. 
  Page 13
https://vtucod e.in
RM& IPR– BRMK557

 
 
 
 
2 
2002 
 The Geographical Indications of Goods (Registration and Protection) 
Rules, 2002 was introduced. 
3 
2003 
 The Geographical Indications of Goods (Registration & Protection) 
Act came into force 
INDUSTRIAL DESIGNS/ DESIGNS 
1 
1872 
 Patterns and Designs Protection Act introduced for the protection of 
new patterns and designs. 
2 
1888 
 Amended as Invention and Design Act, 1988 for the protection of new 
inventions and designs. 
3 
1911 
 Renamed as The Indian Patent and Design Act. 
4 
2000 
 Design Act, 2000 was introduced; separated from the Indian Patent 
and Design Act. 
5 
2001 
 Design Rules, 2001 introduced. 
SEMICONDUCTOR INTEGRATED CIRCUITS: LAYOUT DESIGNS (SICLD) 
1 
2000 
 Semiconductor Integrated Circuits Layout Design (SICLD) Act 2000 
introduced as a signatory of WTO. 
2 
2001 
 SICLD Rules introduced. 
PROTECTION OF PLANT VARITIES AND FARMERS RIGHTS 
1 
1970 
 The Patent Act, 1970 excluded plants and animals in whole or in any 
part from patentability (in 1999 amendments). 
2 
1991 
 Enactment of protection of new varieties of plants on sui generis basis 
on the lines of UPOV. 
3 
2001 
 In line with TRIPS Agreement enactment of PPV&FR Act was 
introduced. 
BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY 
1 
2002 
 The Biological Diversity Act, 2002 introduced on the lines of the 
Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD, 1992). 
2 
2003 
 Establishment of National Biodiversity Authority. 
 Designation of repositories under the Biological Diversity Act 
3 
2004 
 Biological Diversity Rules introduced. 
  Page 14
https://vtucod e.in
RM& IPR– BRMK557

 
 
 
PATENTS 
 A patent is an exclusive right granted for an innovation that generally provides a new 
way of doing something or offers a new technical solution to a problem. 
 The exclusive right legally protects the invention from being copied or reproduced by 
others. 
 In return, the invention must be disclosed in an application in a manner sufficiently clear 
and complete to enable it to be replicated by a person with an ordinary level of skill in the 
relevant field. 
 
CONDITIONS FOR OBTAINING A PATENT PROTECTION 
 
There is a set criterion, as provided in Section 2(1)(j) of the Patents Act, 1970, which must be 
fulfilled for a product or a process to qualify for the grant of a patent. The criterion encompasses: 
 Novelty - Not part of ‘State of the Art’. The innovation claimed in the patent application 
is new and not known to anybody in the world. In other words, the innovation is 
o not in the knowledge of the public, 
o not published anywhere through any means of publication and 
o not be claimed in any other specification by any other applicant. 
 Inventive step - Not obvious to the person (s) skilled in the art. The innovation is 
o a technical advancement over the existing knowledge, 
o possesses economic significance and, 
o not obvious to a person skilled in the concerned subject. 
 Capable of industrial application - For the benefit of society. The invention is capable of 
being made or used in any industry. 
 
TO PATENT OR NOT TO PATENT AN INVENTION 
 
 Once an invention has been developed, the inventor has to decide whether to exploit the 
invention for personal benefits as provided by the statutory laws of the country or put it in 
the public domain. 
 By and large, the inventor prefers the former option. Only a miniscule of inventions is 
placed in the public domain without claiming any benefits. 
  Page 15
https://vtucod e.in
RM& IPR– BRMK557

 
 
 
 In the latter case, anybody can exploit the innovation for commercial or societal benefit 
without paying any money to the inventor. 
 If the owner of an invention wishes to seek monetary gains, he can choose from either of 
the two options, i.e. patenting or Trade Secret. If the inventor is absolutely sure of 
maintaining the secrecy of invention for a very long period (maybe 100 years or more) 
and the probability of reverse engineering of the technology is nil or very low, then the 
―Trade Secret‖ category is preferred. 
 If the invention has a short life span or can be kept secret only for a small period of time 
(a couple of years or so) or the probability of reverse engineering is high once the 
invention is in the public domain, then the ―patent‖ category is preferred. 
 
RIGHTS ASSOCIATED WITH PATENTS 
 
 As per the Court of Law, a patent owner has the right to decide who may or may not use 
the patented invention. 
 In other words, the patent protection provided by the law states that the invention cannot 
be commercially made, used, distributed, imported, or sold by others without the patent 
owner's consent. 
 The patent owner may permit other parties to use the invention on mutually agreed terms. 
 As a matter of fact, the patent rights are negative rights as the owner is restricting others 
from using the patent in any manner without his prior permission. 
 The patent holder may choose to sue the infringing party to stop illegal use of the patent 
and also ask for compensation for the unauthorized use. 
 
ENFORCEMENT OF PATENT RIGHTS 
 
 Enforcement is the process of ensuring compliance with laws, regulations, rules, 
standards and social norms. 
 Patent rights are usually enforced by the judicial courts. 
 The Court of Law has the authority to stop patent infringement. 
 However, the main responsibility for monitoring, identifying and taking action against 
infringers of a patent lies with the patent owner. 
  Page 16
https://vtucod e.in
RM& IPR– BRMK557

 
 
 
INVENTIONS ELIGIBLE FOR PATENTING 
 
 Patents may be granted for inventions/technologies in any field, ranging from a paper clip 
or ballpoint pen to a nanotechnology chip or a Harvard mouse (mouse with cancer 
genes). 
 It is a general belief that patents are awarded only to major scientific breakthroughs. But, 
it is not true. 
 In fact, the majority of patents are granted to inventions displaying an improvement over 
the existing invention. 
 For example, many patents can be awarded to a single molecule e.g. penicillin‘s (an 
antibiotic that kills microbes) and its derivatives. The derivatives are made by making 
subtle changes in the structure of the penicillin resulting in new/improved properties, 
such as acid stability or temperature stability or killing a wide range of microbes (germs). 
The new antibiotic molecules, known as second, third or fourth generation penicillin‘s 
can also be patented. 
 In our daily life, we use many patented items, such as toothbrush, toothpaste, shoes, pen, 
eyeglasses, textiles, mobile phones, wrist watch, bicycle, scooter, car, television, cold 
drinks, beverages and many more. 
 It is not uncommon that many products contain several inventions (patents) e.g. the 
laptop computer involves hundreds of inventions working together. Similarly, cars, 
mobile phones and televisions have many patented components. 
 
NON-PATENTABLE MATTERS 
 
In the Patent Act, 1970, there are some exclusion (product and processes) that cannot be 
patented, such as: 
 Invention contrary to public morality - a method for human cloning, a method for 
gambling. 
 Mere discovery - finding a new micro-organism occurring freely in nature, laws of 
gravity. 
 Mere discovery of a new form of a known substance - use of aspirin for heart 
treatment. Aspirin was patented for reducing fever and mild pains. 
  Page 17
https://vtucod e.in
RM& IPR– BRMK557

 
 
 
 Frivolous invention - dough supplemented with herbs, merely changing the taste of the 
dough, 100 years calendar, and bus timetable. 
 Arrangement or rearrangement - an umbrella fitted with a fan, a torch attached to a 
bucket. 
 Inventions falling within Section 20(1) of the Atomic Energy Act, 1962 - inventions 
relating to compounds of Uranium, Beryllium, Thorium, Plutonium, Radium, Graphite, 
Lithium and more as notified by the Central Government from time to time. 
 Literary, dramatic, musical, artistic work - books, sculptures, drawings, paintings, 
computer programmer, mathematical calculations, online chatting method, method of 
teaching, method of learning a language as they are the subject matter of Copyright Act. 
1957. 
 Topography of integrated circuits - protection of layout designs of integrated circuits is 
provided separately under the Semiconductor Integrated Circuit Layout Designs Act, 
2000. 
 Plants and animals - plants and animals in whole or any part including seeds, varieties 
and species and essentially biological processes for the production or propagation of 
plants and animals are excluded from the scope of protection under patents. 
 Traditional knowledge - an invention which in effect is traditional knowledge or which 
is an aggregation or duplication of known properties of traditionally known components 
are also excluded. 
 
PATENT INFRINGEMENTS 
 
 Once the patent is granted to the applicant, he owns the right to use or exploit the 
invention in any capacity. If anyone uses the invention without the prior permission of 
the owner, that act will be considered an infringement of the invention. Infringements can 
be classified into two categories 
 Direct Infringement - when a product is substantially close to any patented product or in 
a case where the marketing or commercial use of the invention is carried out without the 
permission of the owner of the invention. 
 Indirect Infringement - When some amount of deceit or accidental infringement 
happens without any intention of infringement. If such an unlawful act has been 
  Page 18
https://vtucod e.in
RM& IPR– BRMK557

 
 
 
committed, the patentee holds the right to sue the infringer through judicial intervention. 
Every country has certain laws to deal with such unlawful acts. Following reliefs are 
made available to the patentee: 
o Interlocutory/interim injunction. 
o Damages or accounts of profits. 
o Permanent injunction 
 
AVOID PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF AN INVENTION BEFORE PATENTING 
 
 Generally, an invention that has been either published or publicly displayed cannot be 
patented, as the claimed invention will lose the Novelty ‗criterion. 
 However, under certain circumstances, the Patents Act provides a grace period of 12 
months for filing a patent application from the date of its publication in a journal or 
presentation in a reputed scientific society or exhibition. 
 Sometimes, disclosure of an invention before filing a patent application is unavoidable, 
e.g. selling your invention to a potential investor or a business partner who would like to 
know complete details of the invention in order to judge its commercial value. In such a 
case, it is advisable to sign a Non-Disclosure Agreement (NDA) or any other confidential 
agreement to safeguards your interest 
 
PROCESS OF PATENTING 
 
 In India, the process of grant of a patent is a lengthy procedure that may take anywhere 3- 
4 years or more. The major steps involved in this process are listed in figure 
 
  Page 19
https://vtucod e.in
RM& IPR– BRMK557

 
 
 
 While the process of patenting includes – Prior art search, Choice of Application to be 
Filed, Patent Application Forms, Jurisdiction of Filing Patent Application, Publication, 
Pre-grant Opposition, Examination, Grant of a Patent, Validity of Patent Protection, Post- 
grant Opposition 
 
PRIOR ART SEARCH 
 
 Before an inventor embarks upon the patent filing process, he has to ensure that his 
invention is novel as per the criterion for the grant of a patent. For this, he/she has to 
check whether or not his invention already exists in the public domain. 
 For this, he/she needs to read patent documents and Non-Patent Literature (NPL), 
scientific journals/reports/magazines, etc. 
 The information lying in the public domain in any form, either before the filing of the 
patent application or the priority date of the patent application claiming the invention, is 
termed as Prior Art. 
 Conducting a prior art search before filing the patent has advantages as it averts 
infringement, tracks research and development and provides access to detailed 
information on the invention. 
 The prior art search is carried out on the parameters such as novelty, patentability, state 
of the art, infringement, validity and freedom to operate. 
 The commonly used databases for prior art search fall in two categories i.e. Patents 
Databases and NPL. The patent databases are 
o Indian 
Patent 
Advanced 
Search 
System 
(InPASS- 
http://ipindiaservices.gov.in/publicsearch/). 
o Patentscope (WIPO- https://www.wipo.int/patentscope/en/). 
o Espacenet (EU- https://worldwide.espacenet.com/patent/). 
o USPTO (USA- https://www.uspto.gov/). 
o Google Patents Advanced Search (https://patents.google.com/advanced). 
o Orbit Intelligence (https://www.questel.com/business-intelligence-software/orbit- 
intelligence/). 
o Derwent 
Innovation 
(https://clarivate.com/derwent/solutions/derwent- 
innovation/). 
  Page 20
https://vtucod e.in
RM& IPR– BRMK557

 
 
 
o PROQUEST (https://about.proquest.com/search/?searchKeyword=patent+). 
 Non-Patent Literature (NPL) 
o Scholarly 
publications: 
Handbooks, 
Textbooks, 
Withdrawn, 
Patents, 
Encyclopedias, Journals (IEEE, Research Gate, Springer, Wiley Online Library, 
etc.), Dissertations, NCBI‗s, PubMed, Conference Proceedings, Technical 
Reports, Public Conferences, etc. 
o Industry/trade publications: Industry reviews and public disclosures (Social 
media, YouTube, Books, Magazines, Datasheets, Blueprints, etc.). 
o Others: Newspapers, Websites, Technology blogs, Researchers websites, etc. 
o Although, majority of NPL data is available freely on the public forum, some of 
the journals are paid and can be accessed after paying the subscription. 
o Major Patent Office‘s such as the United States Patent and Trademark Office's 
(USPTO), European Patent Office (EPO), Japan Patent Office (JPO), etc. are 
maintaining in house NPL databases to make patents examination more effective 
 
CHOICE OF APPLICATION TO BE FILED 
 
Once a decision has been made to patent the invention, the next step is, what kind of application 
needs to be filed i.e. provisional patent application or complete (Final) patent application - 
generally, the provisional patent application is preferred for the following reasons: 
 
 It is cheaper, takes less time, and involves fewer formalities. 
 Any improvements made in the invention after the filing of the provisional application 
can be included in the final application. In other words, the provisional application does 
not require complete specifications of the inventions. The application can be filed even 
though some data is yet to be collected from pending experiments. 
 A provisional application allows you to secure a priority date for the patent applied. 
 
PATENT APPLICATION FORMS 
 
 As per the Patent Act, 1970 (Section 39) and the Patents Rules, 2003 (Rule 7, 54, 135 and 
sub rule (1) of rule 20, the application for the grant of patent is filed using Form-1 and 
Form-2. 
  Page 21
https://vtucod e.in
RM& IPR– BRMK557

 
 
 
 The information sought in Form-1 is general in nature i.e. Title of Application, Names of 
Applicant(s) and Inventor(s), Type of Application (Ordinary, Convention, PCT-NP 
(PCT- National Phase), Divisional, Patent of Addition, etc.). 
 Whereas Form-2 seeks technical information and whether to file the provisional 
application or complete the application. For Provisional Application, only Description of 
the Invention and the Abstract is to be furnished. Whereas, Complete Application 
requires Description of the Invention, Abstract, Claims and the manner in which 
invention have to be performed. 
 The Claims of the patent are a very crucial part of the specifications because they define 
the actual boundary of the invention. 
 Claims specify what is actually claimed by the invention and what is being sought to be 
protected. It clearly describes what the patent does and does not cover 
 
  Page 22
https://vtucod e.in
RM& IPR– BRMK557

 
 
 
 
 
  Page 23
https://vtucod e.in
RM& IPR– BRMK557

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Page 24
https://vtucod e.in
RM& IPR– BRMK557

 
 
 
 
 
 Page 25
https://vtucod e.in
RM& IPR– BRMK557

 
 
 
JURISDICTION OF FILING PATENT APPLICATION 
 
Region 
States 
Address 
NORTH 
Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Punjab, 
Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, 
Uttarakhand, Delhi and the Union 
Territory of Chandigarh, Jammu and 
Kashmir and Ladakh. 
Intellectual Property Office Building, Plot 
No. 32, 
Sector 14, Dwarka, 
New Delhi-110078 
Phone: 011-28032491 
Fax: 011-28034301 
Email: delhi-patent@nic.in 
SOUTH 
Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, 
Tamil Nadu, Telangana and the 
Union Territories of Pondicherry 
and Lakshadweep 
Patent Office Intellectual Property Building 
G.S.T. Road, Guindy, Chennai-600032 
Phone: 044-22505242 
Fax: 044-22502066 
Email: chennaipatent@nic.in 
WEST 
Maharashtra, Gujarat, Madhya 
Pradesh, Goa and Chhattisgarh and 
the Union Territories of Daman and 
Diu & Dadra and Nagar Haveli 
Boudhik Sampada Bhawan, Antop Hill, S. M. 
Road, Mumbai - 400 037. 
Phone: 022- 24153651, 24148165 
Fax: 022-24130387 
Email: mumbaipatent@nic.in 
REST OF 
INDIA 
Remaining States 
Intellectual Property Office Building, CP-2 
Sector V, Salt Lake City, Kolkata-700091 
Phone: 033-23679101, 
033-23671987 
Fax: 033-23671988 
Email: kolkatapatent@nic.in 
 
PUBLICATION 
 
 Once the patent application has been filed at the Regional Patent Office, the patent 
application is kept secret for 18 months in the Patent Office. 
  Page 26
https://vtucod e.in
RM& IPR– BRMK557

 
 
 
 After the expiry of 18 months (from the date of filing of the application or the priority 
claimed date, whichever is earlier), the application is published in the Official Journal 
of Patent Office (http://www.ipindia.nic.in/journalpatents.html). 
 The purpose of publishing the application is to inform the public about the invention. 
The publication of an application is a mandatory step. 
 
PRE-GRANT OPPOSITION 
 
 If anybody has an objection to the invention claimed in the patent application, he/she can 
challenge the application by approaching the Controller of Patents within 6 months from 
the date of publication. It is termed as Pre-grant Opposition. 
 Depending on the outcome of the case, the patent application may be rejected or 
recommended for the next step, i.e. patent examination. 
 Although the patent application is kept secret for 18 months, but under special 
circumstances, this period can be reduced when the patentee/applicant plans to sell or 
license the patent or seek an investor). 
 For this, the applicant has to fill a Form-9 and submit it to the Controller General. 
 
EXAMINATION 
 
 Patent examination is a critical step in the process of grant of a patent. All the important 
criteria (novel, inventive step, etc.) are scrutinized by the professionals depending on the 
content of the invention. 
 Usually, the examiner raises certain queries/doubts which need to be addressed by the 
inventors. Once the examiner is satisfied with the answers received from the inventors, 
the application is recommended for the grant of a patent. 
 It is pertinent to mention that a patent application is not examined automatically after 
clearing the publication stage. The applicant or his representative has to make a request 
for examination of the patent by filing Form-18A and submitting the same within 48 
months from the date of filing of the application 
  Page 27
https://vtucod e.in
RM& IPR– BRMK557

 
 
 
GRANT OF PATENT 
 
 After fulfilling all the requirements for the grant of a patent, including all 
objections/queries raised by the Patent Examiner and the public at large, the patent is 
granted to the applicant. 
 The granted patent is published in the Official Journal of the Patent Office. 
 This journal is published every Friday and contains information related to patent 
applications published under section (u/s) 11A, post-grant publication, restoration of 
patent, notifications, list of non-working patents and public notices issued by the Patent 
Office. 
 
VALIDITY OF PATENT PROTECTION 
 
 The patent protection is granted to an applicant for a limited period, generally 20 years, 
starting from the date of filing of the application. 
 Once a patent is granted for an invention in India, the next vital step is to ensure that it is 
renewed annually by paying Patent Renewal Fee as per Section 53, Rule 80 of the Indian 
Patents Act, till the expiry of the patent grant period. 
 Non-payment of Patent Renewal Fee might result in the cancellation of the patent. 
 In some countries, patent protection may be extended beyond 20 years. 
 The extension aims to compensate for the time expended on the administrative approval 
procedure before products can be put on the market. The time taken for this procedure 
means that the patent owner may sometimes not be able to benefit from his right for a 
considerable period after the grant of the patent. 
 
POST GRANT OPPOSITION 
 
 Once the patent has been granted by the Patent Office, it still can be challenged by 
anyone within one year from the date of publication of the grant of the patent. 
 The granted patent can be challenged either via a Patent Office or in a Court of Law. 
 These bodies may invalidate or revoke a patent upon a successful challenge by the 
interested party on the grounds mentioned below: 
  Page 28
https://vtucod e.in
RM& IPR– BRMK557

 
 
 
o The applicant for the patent wrongfully obtained the invention or any part of the 
invention. 
o The invention claimed has been published before the priority date. 
o The invention claimed was publicly known / used before the priority date. 
o The invention claimed is obvious and does not involve an inventive step. 
o The subject of the claim is not patentable as per Chapter II of the Patent Act, 
1970. 
o The details/specifications of the invention do not sufficiently and clearly describe 
the invention. 
 
COMMERCIALIZATION OF A PATENT 
 
 The patent owner may grant permission to an individual/organization/industry to make, 
use, and sell his patented invention. This takes place according to agreed terms and 
conditions between the involving parties. 
 A patent owner may grant a license to a third party for the reasons mentioned below: 
o The patent owner has a decent job e.g. university professor and has no desire or 
aptitude to exploit the patent on his own. 
o The patent owner may not have the necessary manufacturing facilities. 
o The manufacturing facility is not able to meet the market demand. 
o The patent owner wishes to concentrate on one geographic market; for other 
geographical markets, he may choose to license the patent rights. 
 Once the patent is granted, the patentee (person holding the rights to the patent) enjoys 
the exclusive rights to use the patented invention. 
 Only the patentee has the right to license or deal with the patent for any deliberations. 
Although, the validity of the granted patent is for 20 years (from the date of filing a 
patent application), but the patentee is required to furnish information (Form-27), on an 
annual basis relating to the commercialization/selling of the patent. It is called as 
Working/Licensing of the Patent. 
 The licensing of a patent can be exclusive or non-exclusive. 
  Page 29
https://vtucod e.in
RM& IPR– BRMK557

 
 
 
 In an Exclusive License, the patent is sold to only one individual/organization for a fixed 
time period. During this time period, no other person or entity can exploit the relevant IP 
except the named licensee. 
 In Non-Exclusive License, a patentee can sell his patent rights to as many 
individuals/parties as he likes. If the patentee is not able to commercialize his patent 
within three years from the date of the grant of a patent, any person may submit an 
application to the Controller of Patents for grant of Compulsory Licensing (of the patent), 
subject to the fulfillment of following conditions: 
o Reasonable requirements of the public concerning the patented invention have not 
been satisfied. 
o The patented invention is not available to the public at a reasonable price. 
o The patented invention is not worked in the territory of India. 
 
NEED FOR PATENT ATTORNEY / AGENT 
 
 In general, applicants can prepare their patent applications and file them without 
assistance from a patent attorney. 
 However, given the complexity of patent documents, it is advisable to seek legal 
assistance from a patent attorney/agent when drafting a patent application. 
 Furthermore, the legislation of many countries requires that an applicant, whose ordinary 
residence or principal place of business is outside the country, be represented by an 
attorney or agent qualified in the country (which usually means an agent or attorney who 
resides and practices in that country 
 
CAN A WORLDWIDE PATENT BE OBTAINED? 
 
 There is no such term as Universal Patent or World Patent or International Patent as the 
patent rights are territorial. 
 An application for a patent must be filed with a Patent Office of the country in which one 
wishes to seek patent protection. Unfortunately, this option becomes laborious, 
cumbersome, time consuming and expensive if one wishes to file a patent application in 
many countries. 
  Page 30
https://vtucod e.in
RM& IPR– BRMK557

 
 
 
 To ease out this issue, many Regional Offices have been established which receive patent 
applications on behalf of a group of nations e.g. European Patent Office and African 
Regional Intellectual Property Organization. 
 A single application is sufficient to cover many nations that are members of a particular 
regional office/organization. 
 However, if one wishes to seek patent protection in several countries worldwide, it is 
preferred to file an international patent under the Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT). 
 The only condition is that the applicant‗s country should be a member of PCT. India, 
along with over 190 nations, is a member of PCT. 
 
DO I NEED FIRST TO FILE A PATENT IN INDIA 
 
 Yes, in general, Indian residents are required to file the patent application first in India. 
Subsequently, they may file for patent protection in other countries. 
 But for this, prior approval is needed from the Patent Office. However, this approval can 
be waived off under the following circumstances: 
o The applicant is not an Indian resident. 
o If 6 weeks have expired since the patent application was filed in India by an 
Indian resident. 
o If two or more inventors are working on an invention in a foreign country and one 
of the inventors is an Indian resident. The invention does not have a potential 
market in India and hence does not wish to file the patent in India. In such a 
scenario, the Indian resident has to seek Foreign Filing Permission (FFP) from an 
Indian Patent Office. 
o In case of international collaboration, if one part of the invention originated in 
India and the inventor is an Indian resident, he has to seek permission to file the 
patent outside India. 
o If the invention is related to defense or atomic energy or utility model, the 
inventor/s needs to seek permission from the Indian Patent Office because 
inventions related to these domains are not the subject matter of patentability in 
India. 
  Page 31
https://vtucod e.in
RM& IPR– BRMK557

 
 
 
PATENT RELATED FORMS 
 
 There are over 30 patent-related forms. Some of them are mentioned below. 
 
 
FEES STRUCTURE 
 
 As per the patent Act, 1970 and The Patents Rules (1972), the requisite fee has been 
specified based on the type of form/s to be submitted to the Office. 
 Electronically filed applications are 10% cheaper than physical filing. 
  Page 32
https://vtucod e.in
RM& IPR– BRMK557

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TYPES OF PATENT APPLICATIONS 
 
 Provisional Application - A patent application filed when the invention is not fully 
finalized and some part of the invention is still under experimentation. Such type of 
application helps to obtain the priority date for the invention. 
 Ordinary Application - A patent application filed with complete specifications and 
claims but without claiming any priority date. 
 PCT Application - An international application filed in accordance with PCT. A single 
application can be filed to seek patent protection and claim priority in all the member 
countries of PCT. 
 Divisional Application - When an application claims more than one invention, the 
applicant on his own or to meet the official objection on the ground of plurality may 
  Page 33
https://vtucod e.in
RM& IPR– BRMK557

 
 
 
divide the application and file two or more applications. This application divided out of 
the parent one is known as a Divisional Application. 
 Patent of Addition Application - When an invention is a slight modification of the 
earlier invention for which the patentee has already applied for or has obtained a patent, 
the applicant can go for Patent of Addition, if the modification in the invention is new. 
Benefit - There is no need to pay a separate renewal fee for the Patent of Addition, during 
the term of the main patent. It expires along with the main patent. 
 Convention Application - If a patent application has been filed in the Indian Patent 
Office and the applicant wishes to file the same invention in the one or more Convention 
countries (e.g. Paris Convention) by claiming the same priority date on which application 
was filed in India, such an application is known as Convention Application. The 
applicant has to file Convention Application within 12 months from the date of filing in 
India to claim the same priority date. 
 
COMMONLY USED TERMS IN PATENTING 
 
Sl. No 
Terms 
Definition 
1 
Inventor 
Creator of an invention 
2 
Applicant 
Organization/individual/industry that 
files 
a 
patent 
application or applies for a patent 
3 
Patentee 
A person/organization who owns the patent (granted) 
4 
Licensee 
Organization/individual/industry which obtains a license 
of the patent from the Patentee for commercialization 
purpose 
5 
Assignee 
A person in whose name patent has been assigned legally 
6 
In force 
The applicant is paying the annuity (renewal fee) for the 
patent to keep it alive (Active Patent) 
7 
Working of a patent 
The selling   of   a   patent   to   an   individual/party   for 
commercial exploitation is called as working of a patent 
8 
Patent Specification 
Patent specification is a written description of the 
invention and the way of representation and process of 
making and using the same 
  Page 34
https://vtucod e.in
RM& IPR– BRMK557

 
 
 
 
9 
Priority right 
It is a time-limited right, activated by the first filing of an 
application for a patent 
10 
Priority date 
The claimed date on which the first application for the 
invention is filed 
11 
Patent claims 
Claims can be defined as the scope of the protection 
conferred by a patent, or the protection sought in a patent 
application. The purpose of the claims is to define which 
subject matter is protected by the patent 
12 
National phase application 
An application filed to obtain patents in different 
countries 
simultaneously 
based 
on 
a 
single 
International/PCT application 
13 
Patent revocation 
The revocation means cancellation of the patent due to 
certain reasons, such as lack of patentability or 
wrongfully obtaining a patent 
14 
Restoration of patent 
Once a patent has been ceased (e.g. due to non-payment 
of the fee) it can be restored within a permitted period by 
paying the requisite fee 
 
NATIONAL BODIES DEALING WITH PATENT AFFAIRS 
There are many departments/organizations/bodies dealing with various aspects of patents, 
namely, 
 The Indian Patent Office (IPO) - The Office of the Controller General of Patents, 
Designs and Trade Marks generally known as the Indian Patent Office, is an agency 
under the Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade which administers the 
Indian law of Patents, Designs and Trade Marks. 
 Department for Promotion for Industry and Internal Trade (DPIIT) - DPIIT, earlier 
known as the Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion (DIPP), under the Ministry 
of Commerce and Industry, Govt. of India, is the apex IP body. It came into existence in 
1995 and is the main body for regulating and administering the industrial sector. 
 Technology Information, Forecasting and Assessment Council (TIFAC) - The 
importance of undertaking technology forecasting and assessment studies on a systematic 
  Page 35
https://vtucod e.in
RM& IPR– BRMK557

 
 
 
and continuing basis was highlighted in the Government of India‗s Technology Policy 
Statement (TPS) of 1983. Therefore in 1985, TIFAC was established as an autonomous 
body, registered as a Society in 1988, under the Department of Science and Technology. 
It is an important cog in filling a critical gap in the overall Science and Technology 
system of India. Its mission is to assess the state-of-art of technologies and set directions 
for future technological developments in India in important socio-economic sectors 
 National Research Development Corporation (NRDC) - NRDC, an enterprise of 
Department of Scientific & Industrial Research (DSIR), Govt. of India, was set up in 
1953 with a mandate to develop, promote and transfer/commercialize IP and technologies 
emanating 
from 
Higher 
Education 
Institutes 
(HEIs), 
R&D 
research 
laboratories/institutions and Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs). NRDC has a repository 
of 2500 Indian technologies, filed over 1700 Patents and transferred about 5000 
technologies in different sectors in India. It has also created a technology data bank 
(http://fccollc.com/nrdclive/) containing information regarding technologies available in 
various fields, such as electrical & electronics, mechanical, coil, mining, biotechnology, 
healthcare, leather, etc. 
 
UTILITY MODELS 
 
 In many cases, a new invention involves an incremental improvement over the existing 
products, but this technical improvement is not sufficient enough to pass the stringent 
criterion of Novelty and Non-obviousness set aside for the grant of a patent. Such small 
innovations can still be legally protected in some countries and termed as ‗Utility 
Models‘ or ‗Petty Patents‘ or ‗Innovation Patents‘. 
 In this case, the criterion of Novelty and Non-obviousness are diluted or relinquished. 
But the requirement of industrial application or utility is the same as that for patents. 
 Utility Model is a helpful tool for Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) since 
the grant of a Utility Model is usually less rigorous and involves minimal cost. 
 MSMEs do not have deep pockets to carry out intensive R&D leading to the grant of 
patents. But their innovations are good enough for improving their products/processes 
and bringing more financial rewards. Such inventions pass the requirements set aside for 
Utility Models but not for patents. 
  Page 36
https://vtucod e.in
RM& IPR– BRMK557

 
 
 
 The life of the Utility Model is less as compared to the patents. It varies from 7-15 years 
in different countries. 
 Nearly 80 countries, including France, Germany, Japan, South Korea, China, Finland, 
Russian Federation and Spain, provide protection for Utility Models under their IPR 
laws. 
 India till date does not recognize utility patents. If these small patents are recognized 
under IP protection in India, it will catapult the number of patents (filed and granted) on 
annual basis. 
  Page 37
https://vtucod e.in
RM& IPR– BRMK557
