MODULE 5: BASIC PROCESSING UNIT 
SOME FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS 
The processing unit which executes machine instructions and coordinates the 
activities of other units of computer is called the Instruction Set Processor (ISP) or 
processor or Central Processing Unit (CPU). 
The primary function of a processor is to execute the instructions stored in memory. 
Instructions are fetched from successive memory locations and executed in 
processor, until a branch instruction occurs. 
• To execute an instruction, processor has to perform following 3 steps: 
1. Fetch contents of memory-location pointed to by PC. Content of this location is 
an instruction to be  executed.  The  instructions  are  loaded  into  IR, 
Symbolically, this operation is written as: 
IR  [[PC]] 
2. Increment PC by 4. 
PC  [PC] +4 
3. Carry out the actions specified by instruction (in the IR). 
The steps 1 and 2 are referred to as Fetch Phase. 
Step 3 is referred to as Execution Phase. 
• The operation specified by an instruction can be carried out by performing one or 
more of the following actions: 
1) Read the contents of a given memory-location and load them into a register. 
2) Read data from registers or memory location. 
3) Perform an arithmetic or logic operation and place the result into a register. 
4) Store data from a register into a given memory-location. 
• The hardware-components needed to perform these actions are shown in Figure 5.1. 

 
SINGLE BUS ORGANIZATION 
• Here the processor contain only a single bus for the movement of data, address and 
instructions. 
• ALU and all the registers are interconnected via a Single Common Bus (Figure 7.1). 
• Data & address lines of the external memory-bus is connected to the internal 
processor-bus via MDR & MAR respectively. 
(MDR -> Memory Data Register, MAR -> Memory Address Register). 
• MDR has 2 inputs and 2 outputs. Data may be loaded 
→ into MDR either from memory-bus (external) or 
→ from processor-bus (internal). 
• MAR‟s input is connected to internal-bus; MAR‟s output is connected to external- 
bus. (address sent from processor to memory only) 
• Instruction Decoder & Control Unit is responsible for 
→ Decoding the instruction and issuing the control-signals to all the units inside the 
processor. 
→ implementing the actions specified by the instruction (loaded in the IR). 
• Processor Registers - Register R0 through R(n-1) are also called as General 
Purpose Register. 
The programmer can access these registers for general-purpose use. 

• Temporary Registers – There are 3 temporary registers in the processor. Registers 
- Y, Z & Temp are used for temporary storage during program-execution. The 
programmer cannot access these 3 registers. 
• In ALU,  1) “A‟ input gets the operand from the output of the multiplexer (MUX). 
2) “B‟ input gets the operand directly from the processor-bus. 
• There are 2 options provided for “A‟ input of the ALU. 
• MUX is used to select one of the 2 inputs. 
• MUX selects either 
→ output of Y or 
→ constant-value 4( which is used to increment PC content). 
• An instruction is executed by performing one or more of the following operations: 
1) Transfer a word of data from one register to another or to the ALU. 
2) Perform arithmetic or a logic operation and store the result in a register. 

3) Fetch the contents of a given memory-location and load them into a register. 
4) Store a word of data from a register into a given memory-location. 
• Disadvantage: Only one data-word can be transferred over the bus in a clock cycle. 
Solution: Provide multiple internal-paths. Multiple paths allow several data- 
transfers to take place in parallel.

   REGISTER TRANSFERS 
• Instruction execution involves a sequence of steps in which data are transferred 
from one register to another. 
• For each register, two control-signals are used: Riin & Riout. These are called 
Gating Signals. 
• Riin=1 
data on bus is loaded into Ri. Riout=1 
content of Ri is placed on bus. 
Riout=0, 
bus can be used for transferring data from other registers. 
• For example, Move R1, R2; This transfers the contents of register R1 to register R2. 
This can be accomplished as follows: 
1) 
Enable the output of registers R1 by setting R1out to 1 (Figure 7.2). This places the 
contents of R1 on processor-bus. 
2) 
Enable the input of register R2 by setting R2out to 1. 
This loads data from processor-bus into register R4. 
• All operations and data transfers within the processor take place within time- 
periods defined by the 
processor-clock. 

• The control-signals that govern a particular transfer are asserted at the start of the 
 
clock cycle. 
Input & Output Gating for one Register Bit 
• A 2-input multiplexer is used to select the data applied to the input of an edge- 
triggered D flip-flop. 
• 
Riin=1 
mux selects data on bus. This data will be loaded into flip-flop at rising-edge 
of clock. Riin=0 
mux feeds back the value currently stored in flip-flop (Figure 7.3). 
• 
Q output of flip-flop is connected to bus via a tri-state gate. Riout=0 
gate's output is 
in the high-impedance state. 
Riout=1 
the gate drives the bus to 0 or 1, depending on the value of Q

 
PERFORMING AN ARITHMETIC OR LOGIC OPERATION 
• The ALU performs arithmetic operations on the 2 operands applied to its A and B 
inputs. 
• One of the operands is output of MUX; 
And, the other operand is obtained directly from processor-bus. 
• The result (produced by the ALU) is stored temporarily in register Z. 
• The sequence of operations for [R3] [R1]+[R2] is as follows: 
1) R1out, Yin 
2) R2out, SelectY, Add, Zin 
3) Zout, R3in 
• Instruction execution proceeds as follows: 
Step 1 --> Contents from register R1 are loaded into register Y. 
p2 --> Contents from Y and from register R2 are applied to the A and B inputs of ALU; 
Addition is performed & 
Result is stored in the Z register. 
Step 3 --> The contents of Z register is stored in the R3 register. 
• The signals are activated for the duration of the clock cycle corresponding to that 
step. All other signals are inactive. 
CONTROL-SIGNALS OF MDR 
• The MDR register has 4 control-signals (Figure 7.4): 
1) MDRin & MDRout control the connection to the internal processor data bus & 
2) MDRinE & MDRoutE control the connection to the memory Data bus. 
• MAR register has 2 control-signals. 
1) MARin controls the connection to the internal processor address bus & 
2) MARout controls the connection to the memory address bus.

  FETCHING A WORD FROM MEMORY 
• 
To fetch instruction/data from memory, processor transfers required address to MAR. 
At the same time, processor issues Read signal on control-lines of memory-bus. 
• When requested-data are received from memory, they are stored in MDR. From 
MDR, they are transferred to other registers. 
• The response time of each memory access varies (based on cache miss, memory- 
mapped I/O). To accommodate this, MFC is used. (MFC 
Memory Function 
Completed). 
• MFC is a signal sent from addressed-device to the processor. MFC informs the 
processor that the requested operation has been completed by addressed-device. 
• Consider the instruction Move (R1),R2. The sequence of steps is (Figure 7.5): 
1) R1out, MARin, Read ;desired address is loaded into MAR & Read command is issued. 
2) MDRinE, WMFC 
;load MDR from memory-bus & Wait for MFC response from 
memory. 
3) MDRout, R2in 
;load R2 from MDR. 
where WMFC=control-signal that causes processor's control. circuitry to wait for 
arrival of MFC signal. 

 
Storing a Word in Memory 
• Consider the instruction Move R2,(R1). This requires the following sequence: 
1) R1out, MARin 
;desired address is loaded into MAR. 
2) R2out, MDRin, Write 
;data to be written are loaded into MDR & Write command 
is issued. 
3) MDRoutE, WMFC 
;load data into memory-location pointed by R1 from MDR.

      EXECUTION OF A COMPLETE INSTRUCTION 
• Consider the instruction Add (R3),R1 which adds the contents of a memory-location 
pointed by R3 to register  R1.  Executing  this  instruction  requires  the  following 
actions: 
1) Fetch the instruction. 
2) Fetch the first operand. 
3) Perform the addition & 
4) Load the result into R1. 
• Instruction execution proceeds as follows: 
Step1--> The instruction-fetch operation is initiated by 
→ loading contents of PC into MAR & 
→ sending a Read request to memory. 
The Select signal is set to Select4, which causes the Mux to select constant 4. This 
value is added to operand at input B (PC‟s content), and the result is stored in Z. 
Step2--> Updated value in Z is moved to PC. This completes the PC increment operation 
and PC will now point to next instruction. 
Step3--> Fetched instruction is moved into MDR and then to IR. The step 1 through 3 
constitutes the Fetch Phase. 
At the beginning of step 4, the instruction decoder interprets the contents of the IR. 
This enables the control circuitry to activate the control-signals for steps 4 through 
7. 
The step 4 through 7 constitutes the Execution Phase. 
Step4--> Contents of R3 are loaded into MAR & a memory read signal is issued. 
Step5--> Contents of R1 are transferred to Y to prepare for addition. 
Step6--> When Read operation is completed, memory-operand is available in MDR, and the   

addition is performed. 
Step7--> Sum is stored in Z, then transferred to R1.The End signal causes a new 
instruction fetch cycle to begin by returning to step1.

 
Problem 1: 
Why is the Wait-for-memory-function-completed step needed for reading from or 
writing to the main memory? 
Solution: 
The WMFC step is needed to synchronize the operation of the processor and the main 
memory. 
Problem 2: 
For the single bus organization, write the complete control sequence for the 
instruction: Move (R1), R1 
Solution: 
Prob 
lem 
3: 
1) 
PCout, MARin, Read, Select4, Add, Zin 
2) Zout, PCin, Yin, WMFC 
3) MDRout, IRin 
4) R1out, MARin, Read 
5) MDRinE, WMFC 
6) MDRout, R2in, End 
Write the sequence of control steps required for the single bus organization in each of 
the following instructions: 
a) 
Add the immediate number NUM to register R1. 
b) Add the contents of memory-location NUM to register R1. 
c) 
Add the contents of the memory-location whose address is at memory-location 
NUM to register R1. 
Assume that each instruction consists of two words. The first word specifies the 
operation andN the addressing mode, and the second word contains the number 
NUM 
Solution: 

 
Problem 4: 
Show the control steps for the Branch on Negative instruction for a processor with 
three-bus organization of the data path 
Solution: 

 
 
 
 
5.1 
 Pipelining 
 
Pipelining is a technique of decomposing a sequential process into 
suboperations, with each subprocess being executed in a special dedicated 
segment that operates concurrently with all other segments. The name “pipeline” 
implies aflow of information analogous to an industrial assembly line. It is 
characteristic of pipelines that severalcomputations can be in progress in distinct 
segments at the same time. 
• 
Perhaps the simplest way of viewing the pipeline structure is to imagine that each segment consists 
of an input register followed by a combinational circuit. 
o 
The register holds the data. 
o 
The combinational circuit performs the suboperation in the particular segment. 
• 
A clock is applied to all registers after enough time has elapsed to perform all segment 
activity. 
• 
Example 
• 
The pipeline organization will be demonstrated by means of a simple example. 
o To perform the combined multiply and add operations with a stream 
of numbers 
Ai * Bi + Ci fori = 1, 2, 3, …, 7 
 
• 
Each suboperation is to be implemented in a segment within a pipeline. 
o 
R1  Ai, R2  Bi 
Input Ai and Bi 
o 
R3  R1 * R2, R4 Ci Multiply and input Ci 
o 
R5  R3 + R4 
Add Ci to product 
The five registers are loaded with new data every clock pulse. The effect of 
each clock is shown in Table 9-1. The first clock pulse transfers A1 and 31 into R1 
andR2. The second clock pulse transfers the product of R1 and R2 into R3 and C1into 
R4. The same clock pulse transfers A2 and B2 into R1 and R2. The third clock pulse 
operates on all three segments simultaneously. It places A3 and B3into R1 and R2, 
transfers the product of R1 and R2 into R3, transfers C2 intoR4, and places the 
sum of R3 and R4 into R5. It takes three clock pulses to fill up the pipe and 
retrieve the first output from R5. From there on, each clock produces a new output 
and moves the data one step down the pipeline. This happens as long as new input 
data flow into the system. When no more input data are available, the clock must 
continue until the last output emerges out of the pipeline. 
• 
Each segment has one or two registers and a combinational circuit as shown in Fig. 9- 2. 

 
 
 
 
• 
The five registers are loaded with new data every clock pulse. The effect of each clock is shown 
in Table 9-1. 
 
General considerations 
 
• 
Any operation that can be decomposed into a sequence of sub operations of about the same 
complexity can be implemented by a pipeline processor. 
• 
The general structure of a four-segment pipeline is illustrated in Fig. 9-3. 
• 
We define a task as the total operation performed going through all the segments in the pipeline. 
• 
The behavior of a pipeline can be illustrated with a space-time diagram. 
o It shows the segment utilization as a function of time. 

 
 
 
 
 
• 
The space-time diagram of a four-segment pipeline is demonstrated in Fig. 9-4. 
• 
Where a k-segment pipeline with a clock cycle time tp is used to execute n tasks. 
o 
The first task T1 requires a time equal to ktp to complete its operation. 
o 
The remaining n-1 tasks will be completed after a time equal to (n-1)tp 
o 
Therefore, to complete n tasks using a k-segment pipeline requires k+(n-1) clock cycles. 
• 
Consider a nonpipeline unit that performs the same operation and takes a time equal to tn to 
complete each task. 
o The total time required for n tasks is ntn. 
 
 
• 
The speedup of a pipeline processing over an equivalent nonpipeline processing is defined by the 
ratio 
S = ntn/(k+n-1)tp . 
• 
If n becomes much larger than k-1, the speedup becomes 
S = tn/tp. 
• 
If we assume that the time it takes to process a task is the same in the pipeline and nonpipeline 
circuits, i.e.,tn = ktp, the speedup reduces to S=ktp/tp=k. 
• 
This shows that the theoretical maximum speedup that a pipeline can provide is k, where k is the 
number of segments in the pipeline. 
• 
To duplicate the theoretical speed advantage of a pipeline process by means of multiple 
functional units, it is necessary to construct k identical units that will be operating in parallel. 
• 
This is illustrated in Fig. 9-5, where four identical circuits are connected in parallel. 
• 
Instead of operating with the input data in sequence as in a pipeline, the parallel circuits accept 
four input data items simultaneously and perform four tasks at the same time. 

 
 
 
 
 
5.2 
Arithmetic Pipeline 
 
• 
There are various reasons why the pipeline cannot operate at its maximum theoretical 
rate. 
o 
Different segments may take different times to complete their sub operation. 
o 
It is not always correct to assume that a nonpipe circuit has the same time delay as that of 
an equivalent pipeline circuit. 
• 
There are two areas of computer design where the pipeline organization is applicable. 
o 
Arithmetic pipeline 
o 
Instruction pipeline 
Arithmetic Pipeline: Introduction 
 
• 
Pipeline arithmetic units are usually found in very high speed computers 
o Floating–point operations, multiplication of fixed-point numbers, and 
similar computations in scientific problem 
• 
Floating–point operations are easily decomposed into suboperations as demonstrated in Sec. 10-5. 
• 
An example of a pipeline unit for floating-point addition and subtraction is showed in the following: 
o The inputs to the floating-point adder pipeline are two normalized 
floating- point binary number 
 
X = A 2a 
Y = B  2b 
• 
A and B are two fractions that represent the mantissas, a and b are the exponents. 
• 
The floating-point addition and subtraction can be performed in four segments, as shown in Fig. 
9-6. 
• 
The suboperations that are performed in the four segments are: 
o 
Compare the exponents 
▪ 
The larger exponent is chosen as the exponent of the result. 
o 
Align the mantissas 

 
 
 
 
 
▪ 
The exponent difference determines how many times the mantissa associated 
with the smaller exponent must be shifted to the right. 
o 
Add or subtract the mantissas 
o 
Normalize the result 
▪ 
When an overflow occurs, the mantissa of the sum or difference is shifted right 
and the exponent incremented by one. 
▪ 
If an underflow occurs, the number of leading zeros in the mantissa determines 
the number of left shifts in the mantissa and the number that must be subtracted 
from the exponent. 
 
4.4 Instruction Pipeline 
 
• 
Introduction: 
• 
Pipeline processing can occur not only in the data stream but in the instruction as well. 
• 
Consider a computer with an instruction fetch unit (FIFO)and an instruction execution 
unit(PC) designed to provide a two-segment pipeline. 
• 
Computers with complex instructions require other phases in addition to above phases to 
process an instruction completely. 
• 
In the most general case, the computer needs to process each instruction with the following 
sequence of steps. 
o 
Fetch the instruction from memory. 
o 
Decode the instruction. 
o 
Calculate the effective address. 
o 
Fetch the operands from memory. 
o 
Execute the instruction. 
o 
Store the result in the proper place. 
• 
There are certain difficulties that will prevent the instruction pipeline from operating at its 
maximum rate. 

 
 
o 
Different segments may take different times to operate on the incoming information. 
o 
Some segments are skipped for certain operations. 
o 
Two or more segments may require memory access at the same time, causing one 
segment to wait until another is finished with the memory. 
Example: four-segment instruction pipeline: 
 
• 
Assume that: 
o 
The decoding of the instruction can be combined with the calculation of the effective 
address into one segment. 
o 
The instruction execution and storing of the result can be combined into one segment. 
• 
Fig 9-7 shows how the instruction cycle in the CPU can be processed with a four- segment 
pipeline. 
o 
Thus up to four suboperations in the instruction cycle can overlap and up to four different 
instructions can be in progress of being processed at the same time. 
 
 
• 
An instruction in the sequence may be causes a branch out of normal sequence. 
o 
In that case the pending operations in the last two segments are completed and all 
information stored in the instruction buffer is deleted. 
o 
Similarly, an interrupt request will cause the pipeline to empty and start again from a new 
address value. 
• 
Fig. 9-8 shows the operation of the instruction pipeline. 

The time in thehorizontal axis is divided into steps of equal duration. The four segments 
arerepresented in the diagram with an abbreviated symbol. 
1. F1 is the segment that fetches an instruction. 
2. DA is the segment that decodes the instruction and calculates theeffective address. 
3. Fo is the segment that fetches the operand. 
4. EX is the segment that executes the instruction. 
It is assumed that the processor has separate instruction and data memoriesso that the operation in F1 
and PC can proceed at the same time. In the absenceof a branch instruction, each segment operates on 
different instructions. Thus,in step 4, instruction 
1 is being executed in segment EX; the operand forinstruction 2 is being fetched in segment FO; 
instruction 3 is being decoded insegment DA; and instruction 4 is being fetched from memory in 
segment FI. 
Assume now that instruction 3 is a branch instruction. As soon as thisinstruction is 
decoded in segment DA in step 4, the transfer from F1 to DA ofthe other instructions is halted until 
the branch instruction is executed in step6. If the branch is taken, a new instruction is fetched in 
step 7. If the branchis not taken, the instruction fetched previously in step 4 can be used. 
Thepipeline then continues until a new branch instruction is encountered. 
Another delay may occur in the pipeline if the EX segment needs to storethe result of the 
operation in the data memory while the FO segment needsto fetch an operand. In that case, 
segment FO must wait until segment EX hasfinished its operation. 
• 
In general, there are three major difficulties that cause the instruction pipeline to deviate from its normal 
operation. 
o 
Resource conflicts caused by access to memory by two segments at the same time. 
▪ 
Can be resolved by using separate instruction and data memories 
o 
Data dependency conflicts arise when an instruction depends on the result of a previous instruction, but this 
result is not yet available. 
o 
Branch difficulties arise from branch and other instructions that change the value of PC. 

 
