648  CHAPTER 19 / ELECTRONIC MAIL SECURITY
which may result in blocking the transmission of the email content. Alternatively, 
the entire message can be absorbed and buffered until all the checks are finished. 
In either case, checks must be completed before the mail message is sent to the end 
user’s inbox.
The checking involves the following rules:
1. If no SPF TXT RR is returned, the default behavior is to accept the message.
2. If the SPF TXT RR has formatting errors, the default behavior is to accept the 
message.
3. Otherwise the mechanisms and modifiers in the RR are used to determine 
disposition of the email message.
Figure 19.9 illustrates SPF operation.
 19.9 DOMAINKEYS IDENTIFIED MAIL
DomainKeys Identified Mail (DKIM) is a specification for cryptographically 
signing email messages, permitting a signing domain to claim responsibility for a 
message in the mail stream. Message recipients (or agents acting in their  behalf) 
can verify the signature by querying the signer’s domain directly to  retrieve the 
appropriate public key and thereby can confirm that the message was attested to 
by a party in possession of the private key for the signing domain. DKIM is an 
Internet Standard (RFC 6376: DomainKeys Identified Mail (DKIM) Signatures). 
DKIM has been widely adopted by a range of email providers, including 
 corporations, government agencies, gmail, Yahoo!, and many Internet Service 
Providers (ISPs).
Figure 19.9 Sender Policy Framework Operation
Sender
Inbound
mail server
SPF record
lookup
Authorization
pass/fail
Further
policy
checks
Inbox
Junk email
Quarantine
Block/delete
DNS
Internet
MODULE 5

19.9 / DOMAINKEYS IDENTIFIED MAIL 649
Email Threats
RFC 4686 (Analysis of Threats Motivating DomainKeys Identified Mail) describes 
the threats being addressed by DKIM in terms of the characteristics, capabilities, 
and location of potential attackers.
CHARACTERISTICS RFC 4686 characterizes the range of attackers on a spectrum of 
three levels of threat.
1. At the low end are attackers who simply want to send email that a  recipient 
does not want to receive. The attacker can use one of a number of  commercially 
available tools that allow the sender to falsify the origin address of messages. 
This makes it difficult for the receiver to filter spam on the basis of originating 
address or domain.
2. At the next level are professional senders of bulk spam mail. These attackers 
often operate as commercial enterprises and send messages on behalf of third 
parties. They employ more comprehensive tools for attack, including Mail 
Transfer Agents (MTAs) and registered domains and networks of compro-
mised computers (zombies), to send messages and (in some cases) to harvest 
addresses to which to send.
3. The most sophisticated and financially motivated senders of messages are 
those who stand to receive substantial financial benefit, such as from an email-
based fraud scheme. These attackers can be expected to employ all of the 
above mechanisms and additionally may attack the Internet infrastructure 
 itself, including DNS cache-poisoning attacks and IP routing attacks.
CAPABILITIES RFC 4686 lists the following as capabilities that an attacker might 
have.
1. Submit messages to MTAs and Message Submission Agents (MSAs) at 
 multiple locations in the Internet.
2. Construct arbitrary Message Header fields, including those claiming to be 
mailing lists, resenders, and other mail agents.
3. Sign messages on behalf of domains under their control.
4. Generate substantial numbers of either unsigned or apparently signed 
 messages that might be used to attempt a denial-of-service attack.
5. Resend messages that may have been previously signed by the domain.
6. Transmit messages using any envelope information desired.
7. Act as an authorized submitter for messages from a compromised computer.
8. Manipulation of IP routing. This could be used to submit messages from 
 specific IP addresses or difficult-to-trace addresses, or to cause diversion of 
messages to a specific domain.
9. Limited influence over portions of DNS using mechanisms such as cache 
 poisoning. This might be used to influence message routing or to falsify adver-
tisements of DNS-based keys or signing practices.

650  CHAPTER 19 / ELECTRONIC MAIL SECURITY
10. Access to significant computing resources, for example, through the conscrip-
tion of worm-infected “zombie” computers. This could allow the “bad actor” to 
perform various types of brute-force attacks.
11. Ability to eavesdrop on existing traffic, perhaps from a wireless network.
LOCATION DKIM focuses primarily on attackers located outside of the administra-
tive units of the claimed originator and the recipient. These administrative units 
frequently correspond to the protected portions of the network adjacent to the orig-
inator and recipient. It is in this area that the trust relationships required for authen-
ticated message submission do not exist and do not scale adequately to be practical. 
Conversely, within these administrative units, there are other mechanisms (such as 
authenticated message submission) that are easier to deploy and more likely to be 
used than DKIM. External bad actors are usually attempting to exploit the “any-to-
any” nature of email that motivates most recipient MTAs to accept messages from 
anywhere for delivery to their local domain. They may generate messages without 
signatures, with incorrect signatures, or with correct signatures from domains with 
little traceability. They may also pose as mailing lists, greeting cards, or other agents 
that legitimately send or resend messages on behalf of others.
DKIM Strategy
DKIM is designed to provide an email authentication technique that is transparent 
to the end user. In essence, a user’s email message is signed by a private key of the 
administrative domain from which the email originates. The signature covers all of 
the content of the message and some of the RFC 5322 message headers. At the 
 receiving end, the MDA can access the corresponding public key via a DNS and 
verify the signature, thus authenticating that the message comes from the claimed 
administrative domain. Thus, mail that originates from somewhere else but claims 
to come from a given domain will not pass the authentication test and can be 
 rejected. This approach differs from that of S/MIME and PGP, which use the origi-
nator’s private key to sign the content of the message. The motivation for DKIM is 
based on the following reasoning:2
1. S/MIME depends on both the sending and receiving users employing S/MIME. 
For almost all users, the bulk of incoming mail does not use S/MIME, and the 
bulk of the mail the user wants to send is to recipients not using S/MIME.
2. S/MIME signs only the message content. Thus, RFC 5322 header information 
concerning origin can be compromised.
3. DKIM is not implemented in client programs (MUAs) and is therefore trans-
parent to the user; the user need not take any action.
4. DKIM applies to all mail from cooperating domains.
5. DKIM allows good senders to prove that they did send a particular message 
and to prevent forgers from masquerading as good senders.
2 The reasoning is expressed in terms of the use of S/MIME. The same argument applies to PGP.

19.9 / DOMAINKEYS IDENTIFIED MAIL 651
Figure 19.10 Simple Example of DKIM Deployment
Mail origination
network
Mail delivery
network
DNS Public key query/response
DNS = Domain Name System
MDA = Mail Delivery Agent
MSA = Mail Submission Agent
MTA = Message Transfer Agent
MUA = Message User Agent
SMTP
MUA
MUA
SMTP
SMTP
Signer
Verifier
SMTP
POP, IMAP
MTA
MSA
MTA
MDA
DNS
Figure 19.10 is a simple example of the operation of DKIM. We begin with a 
message generated by a user and transmitted into the MHS to an MSA that is within 
the user’s administrative domain. An email message is generated by an email client 
program. The content of the message, plus selected RFC 5322 headers, is signed by 
the email provider using the provider’s private key. The signer is associated with a 
domain, which could be a corporate local network, an ISP, or a public email facility 
such as gmail. The signed message then passes through the Internet via a sequence 
of MTAs. At the destination, the MDA retrieves the public key for the incoming 
signature and verifies the signature before passing the message on to the destination 
email client. The default signing algorithm is RSA with SHA-256. RSA with SHA-1 
also may be used.
DKIM Functional Flow
Figure 19.11 provides a more detailed look at the elements of DKIM operation. 
Basic message processing is divided between a signing Administrative Management 
Domain (ADMD) and a verifying ADMD. At its simplest, this is between the origi-
nating ADMD and the delivering ADMD, but it can involve other ADMDs in the 
handling path.
Signing is performed by an authorized module within the signing ADMD 
and uses private information from a Key Store. Within the originating ADMD, 

652  CHAPTER 19 / ELECTRONIC MAIL SECURITY
this might be performed by the MUA, MSA, or an MTA. Verifying is  performed 
by an authorized module within the verifying ADMD. Within a delivering 
ADMD, verifying might be performed by an MTA, MDA or MUA. The mod-
ule verifies the signature or determines whether a particular signature was 
 required. Verifying the signature uses public information from the Key Store. 
If the signature passes, reputation information is used to assess the signer and 
that information is passed to the message filtering system. If the signature fails 
or there is no signature using the author’s domain, information about signing 
practices related to the author can be retrieved remotely and/or locally, and that 
information is passed to the message filtering system. For example, if the sender 
(e.g., gmail) uses DKIM but no DKIM signature is present, then the message 
may be  considered fraudulent.
Figure 19.11 DKIM Functional Flow
Originating or relaying ADMD:
Sign message with SDID
RFC 5322 message
yes
pass
fail
no
Relaying or delivering ADMD:
Message signed?
Verify
signature
Private
key
store
(paired)
Public
key
store
Remote
sender
practices
Local info
on sender
practices
Reputation/
accreditation
information
Assessments
Message
filtering
engine
Check
signing
practices
Internet

19.9 / DOMAINKEYS IDENTIFIED MAIL 653
The signature is inserted into the RFC 5322 message as an additional header 
entry, starting with the keyword Dkim-Signature. You can view examples from your 
own incoming mail by using the View Long Headers (or similar wording) option for 
an incoming message. Here is an example:
Dkim-Signature: 
v=1; a=rsa-sha256; c=relaxed/relaxed;  
 
 
d=gmail.com; s=gamma; h=domainkey- 
 
 
signature:mime-version:received:date: 
 
 
message-id:subject :from:to:content-type: 
 
 
content-transfer-encoding; 
 
 
bh=5mZvQDyCRuyLb1Y28K4zgS2MPOemFToDBgvbJ 
 
 
7GO90s=; 
 
 
 b=PcUvPSDygb4ya5Dyj1rbZGp/VyRiScuaz7TTG 
J5qW5slM+klzv6kcfYdGDHzEVJW+Z 
 
 
FetuPfF1ETOVhELtwH0zjSccOyPkEiblOf6gILO
 
 
bm3DDRm3Ys1/FVrbhVOlA+/jH9Aei 
 
 
uIIw/5iFnRbSH6qPDVv/beDQqAWQfA/wF7O5k=
Before a message is signed, a process known as canonicalization is performed 
on both the header and body of the RFC 5322 message. Canonicalization is necessary 
to deal with the possibility of minor changes in the message made en route, includ-
ing character encoding, treatment of trailing white space in message lines, and the 
“folding” and “unfolding” of header lines. The intent of canonicalization is to make a 
minimal transformation of the message (for the purpose of signing; the message itself 
is not changed, so the canonicalization must be performed again by the verifier) that 
will give it its best chance of producing the same canonical value at the receiving end. 
DKIM defines two header canonicalization algorithms (“simple” and “relaxed”) and 
two for the body (with the same names). The simple algorithm tolerates almost no 
modification, while the relaxed algorithm tolerates common modifications.
The signature includes a number of fields. Each field begins with a tag consist-
ing of a tag code followed by an equals sign and ends with a semicolon. The fields 
include the following:
 
■v= DKIM version/
 
■a= Algorithm used to generate the signature; must be either rsa-sha1 or 
rsa-sha256
 
■c= Canonicalization method used on the header and the body.
 
■d= A domain name used as an identifier to refer to the identity of a responsible 
person or organization. In DKIM, this identifier is called the Signing Domain 
IDentifier (SDID). In our example, this field indicates that the sender is using 
a gmail address.
 
■s= In order that different keys may be used in different circumstances for the 
same signing domain (allowing expiration of old keys, separate departmen-
tal signing, or the like), DKIM defines a selector (a name associated with a 
key) that is used by the verifier to retrieve the proper key during signature 
verification.

654  CHAPTER 19 / ELECTRONIC MAIL SECURITY
 
■h= Signed Header fields. A colon-separated list of header field names that 
identify the header fields presented to the signing algorithm. Note that in our 
example above, the signature covers the domainkey-signature field. This refers 
to an older algorithm (since replaced by DKIM) that is still in use.
 
■bh= The hash of the canonicalized body part of the message. This provides 
 additional information for diagnosing signature verification failures.
 
■b= The signature data in base64 format; this is the encrypted hash code.
 19.10  DOMAIN-BASED MESSAGE AUTHENTICATION, 
REPORTING, AND CONFORMANCE
Domain-Based Message Authentication, Reporting, and Conformance (DMARC) 
 allows email senders to specify policy on how their mail should be handled, the 
types of reports that receivers can send back, and the frequency those reports 
should be sent. It is defined in RFC 7489 (Domain-based Message Authentication, 
Reporting, and Conformance, March 2015).
DMARC works with SPF and DKIM. SPF and DKM enable senders to advise 
receivers, via DNS, whether mail purporting to come from the sender is valid, and 
whether it should be delivered, flagged, or discarded. However, neither SPF nor 
DKIM include a mechanism to tell receivers if SPF or DKIM are in use, nor do they 
have feedback mechanism to inform senders of the effectiveness of the anti-spam 
techniques. For example, if a message arrives at a receiver without a DKIM signa-
ture, DKIM provides no mechanism to allow the receiver to learn if the message is 
authentic but was sent from a sender that did not implement DKIM, or if the mes-
sage is a spoof. DMARC addresses these issues essentially by standardizing how 
email receivers perform email authentication using SPF and DKIM mechanisms.
Identifier Alignment
DKIM, SPF, and DMARC authenticate various aspects of an individual mes-
sage. DKIM authenticates the domain that affixed a signature to the message. SPF 
 focuses on the SMTP envelope, defined in RFC 5321. It can authenticate either the 
domain that appears in the MAIL FROM portion of the SMTP envelope or the 
HELO domain, or both. These may be different domains, and they are typically not 
visible to the end user.
DMARC authentication deals with the From domain in the message header, 
as defined in RFC 5322. This field is used as the central identity of the DMARC 
mechanism because it is a required message header field and therefore guaranteed 
to be present in compliant messages, and most MUAs represent the RFC 5322 From 
field as the originator of the message and render some or all of this header field’s 
content to end users. The email address in this field is the one used by end users to 
identify the source of the message and therefore is a prime target for abuse.
DMARC requires that From address match (be aligned with) an Authenticated 
Identifier from DKIM or SPF. In the case of DKIM, the match is made between 
the DKIM signing domain and the From domain. In the case of SPF, the match is 
 between the SPF-authenticated domain and the From domain.

662  CHAPTER 20 / IP SECURITY
There are application-specific security mechanisms for a number of application 
areas, including electronic mail (S/MIME, PGP), client/server (Kerberos), Web ac-
cess (Secure Sockets Layer), and others. However, users have security concerns that 
cut across protocol layers. For example, an enterprise can run a secure, private IP 
network by disallowing links to untrusted sites, encrypting packets that leave the 
premises, and authenticating packets that enter the premises. By implementing se-
curity at the IP level, an organization can ensure secure networking not only for 
applications that have security mechanisms but also for the many security-ignorant 
applications.
IP-level security encompasses three functional areas: authentication, confiden-
tiality, and key management. The authentication mechanism assures that a received 
packet was, in fact, transmitted by the party identified as the source in the packet 
header. In addition, this mechanism assures that the packet has not been altered in 
transit. The confidentiality facility enables communicating nodes to encrypt messages 
to prevent eavesdropping by third parties. The key management facility is concerned 
with the secure exchange of keys.
We begin this chapter with an overview of IP security (IPsec) and an introduc-
tion to the IPsec architecture. We then look at each of the three functional areas in 
detail. Appendix L reviews Internet protocols.
 20.1 IP SECURITY OVERVIEW
In 1994, the Internet Architecture Board (IAB) issued a report titled “Security in 
the Internet Architecture” (RFC 1636). The report identified key areas for security 
mechanisms. Among these were the need to secure the network infrastructure from 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
 
◆
Present an overview of IP security (IPsec).
 
◆
Explain the difference between transport mode and tunnel mode.
 
◆
Understand the concept of security association.
 
◆
Explain the difference between the security association database and the 
security policy database.
 
◆
Summarize the traffic processing functions performed by IPsec for out-
bound packets and for inbound packets.
 
◆
Present an overview of Encapsulating Security Payload.
 
◆
Discuss the alternatives for combining security associations.
 
◆
Present an overview of Internet Key Exchange.
 
◆
Summarize the alternative cryptographic suites approved for use with IPsec.

20.1 / IP SECURITY OVERVIEW 663
unauthorized monitoring and control of network traffic and the need to secure end-
user-to-end-user traffic using authentication and encryption mechanisms.
To provide security, the IAB included authentication and encryption as nec-
essary security features in the next-generation IP, which has been issued as IPv6. 
Fortunately, these security capabilities were designed to be usable both with the 
current IPv4 and the future IPv6. This means that vendors can begin offering these 
features now, and many vendors now do have some IPsec capability in their prod-
ucts. The IPsec specification now exists as a set of Internet standards.
Applications of IPsec
IPsec provides the capability to secure communications across a LAN, across pri-
vate and public WANs, and across the Internet. Examples of its use include:
 
■Secure branch office connectivity over the Internet: A company can build a 
secure virtual private network over the Internet or over a public WAN. This 
enables a business to rely heavily on the Internet and reduce its need for pri-
vate networks, saving costs and network management overhead.
 
■Secure remote access over the Internet: An end user whose system is equipped 
with IP security protocols can make a local call to an Internet Service Provider 
(ISP) and gain secure access to a company network. This reduces the cost of 
toll charges for traveling employees and telecommuters.
 
■Establishing extranet and intranet connectivity with partners: IPsec can be 
used to secure communication with other organizations, ensuring authentica-
tion and confidentiality and providing a key exchange mechanism.
 
■Enhancing electronic commerce security: Even though some Web and elec-
tronic commerce applications have built-in security protocols, the use of IPsec 
enhances that security. IPsec guarantees that all traffic designated by the net-
work administrator is both encrypted and authenticated, adding an additional 
layer of security to whatever is provided at the application layer.
The principal feature of IPsec that enables it to support these varied applica-
tions is that it can encrypt and/or authenticate all traffic at the IP level. Thus, all dis-
tributed applications (including remote logon, client/server, email, file transfer, Web 
access, and so on) can be secured. Figure 20.1a shows a simplified packet format for 
an IPsec option known as tunnel mode, described subsequently. Tunnel mode makes 
use of an IPsec function, a combined authentication/encryption  function called 
Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP), and a key exchange function. For VPNs, 
both authentication and encryption are generally desired, because it is important 
both to (1) assure that unauthorized users do not penetrate the VPN, and (2) assure 
that eavesdroppers on the Internet cannot read messages sent over the VPN.
Figure 20.1b is a typical scenario of IPsec usage. An organization maintains 
LANs at dispersed locations. Nonsecure IP traffic is conducted on each LAN. For 
traffic offsite, through some sort of private or public WAN, IPsec protocols are used. 
These protocols operate in networking devices, such as a router or firewall, that 
connect each LAN to the outside world. The IPsec networking device will  typically 
encrypt all traffic going into the WAN and decrypt traffic coming from the WAN; 
these operations are transparent to workstations and servers on the LAN. Secure 

664  CHAPTER 20 / IP SECURITY
transmission is also possible with individual users who dial into the WAN. Such user 
workstations must implement the IPsec protocols to provide security.
Benefits of IPsec
Some of the benefits of IPsec:
 
■When IPsec is implemented in a firewall or router, it provides strong security 
that can be applied to all traffic crossing the perimeter. Traffic within a com-
pany or workgroup does not incur the overhead of security-related processing.
Figure 20.1 An IPSec VPN Scenario
Networking device
with IPSec
Ethernet
switch
Unprotected
IP traffic
Legend:
User system
with IPSec
(a) Tunnel-mode format
(b) Example configuration
Public (Internet)
or private
network
authenticated
encrypted
ESP
auth
orig IP
hdr
IP payload
ESP
trlr
ESP
hdr
IP traffic
protected
by IPSec
Virtual tunnel:
protected
by IPSec
New IP
hdr

20.1 / IP SECURITY OVERVIEW 665
 
■IPsec in a firewall is resistant to bypass if all traffic from the outside must use 
IP and the firewall is the only means of entrance from the Internet into the 
organization.
 
■IPsec is below the transport layer (TCP, UDP) and so is transparent to appli-
cations. There is no need to change software on a user or server system when 
IPsec is implemented in the firewall or router. Even if IPsec is implemented in 
end systems, upper-layer software, including applications, is not affected.
 
■IPsec can be transparent to end users. There is no need to train users on secu-
rity mechanisms, issue keying material on a per-user basis, or revoke keying 
material when users leave the organization.
 
■IPsec can provide security for individual users if needed. This is useful for off-
site workers and for setting up a secure virtual subnetwork within an organiza-
tion for sensitive applications.
Routing Applications
In addition to supporting end users and protecting premises systems and networks, 
IPsec can play a vital role in the routing architecture required for internetworking. 
[HUIT98] lists the following examples of the use of IPsec. IPsec can assure that
 
■A router advertisement (a new router advertises its presence) comes from an 
authorized router.
 
■A neighbor advertisement (a router seeks to establish or maintain a neighbor 
relationship with a router in another routing domain) comes from an autho-
rized router.
 
■A redirect message comes from the router to which the initial IP packet was sent.
 
■A routing update is not forged.
Without such security measures, an opponent can disrupt communications 
or divert some traffic. Routing protocols such as Open Shortest Path First (OSPF) 
should be run on top of security associations between routers that are defined by 
IPsec.
IPsec Documents
IPsec encompasses three functional areas: authentication, confidentiality, and key 
management. The totality of the IPsec specification is scattered across dozens of 
RFCs and draft IETF documents, making this the most complex and difficult to 
grasp of all IETF specifications. The best way to grasp the scope of IPsec is to 
consult the latest version of the IPsec document roadmap, which as of this writ-
ing is RFC 6071 [IP Security (IPsec) and Internet Key Exchange (IKE) Document 
Roadmap, February 2011]. The documents can be categorized into the following 
groups.
 
■Architecture: Covers the general concepts, security requirements, definitions, 
and mechanisms defining IPsec technology. The current specification is RFC 
4301, Security Architecture for the Internet Protocol.

666  CHAPTER 20 / IP SECURITY
 
■Authentication Header (AH): AH is an extension header to provide mes-
sage authentication. The current specification is RFC 4302, IP Authentication 
Header. Because message authentication is provided by ESP, the use of 
AH is deprecated. It is included in IPsecv3 for backward compatibility 
but should not be used in new applications. We do not discuss AH in this 
chapter.
 
■Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP): ESP consists of an encapsulat-
ing header and trailer used to provide encryption or combined encryption/ 
authentication. The current specification is RFC 4303, IP Encapsulating 
Security Payload (ESP).
 
■Internet Key Exchange (IKE): This is a collection of documents describing 
the key management schemes for use with IPsec. The main specification is 
RFC 7296, Internet Key Exchange (IKEv2) Protocol, but there are a number 
of  related RFCs.
 
■Cryptographic algorithms: This category encompasses a large set of docu-
ments that define and describe cryptographic algorithms for encryption, mes-
sage authentication, pseudorandom functions (PRFs), and cryptographic key 
exchange.
 
■Other: There are a variety of other IPsec-related RFCs, including those deal-
ing with security policy and management information base (MIB) content.
IPsec Services
IPsec provides security services at the IP layer by enabling a system to select 
 required security protocols, determine the algorithm(s) to use for the service(s), 
and put in place any cryptographic keys required to provide the requested  services. 
Two protocols are used to provide security: an authentication protocol designated 
by the header of the protocol, Authentication Header (AH); and a combined 
 encryption/authentication protocol designated by the format of the packet for 
that protocol, Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP). RFC 4301 lists the following 
services:
 
■Access control
 
■Connectionless integrity
 
■Data origin authentication
 
■Rejection of replayed packets (a form of partial sequence integrity)
 
■Confidentiality (encryption)
 
■Limited traffic flow confidentiality
Transport and Tunnel Modes
Both AH and ESP support two modes of use: transport and tunnel mode. The oper-
ation of these two modes is best understood in the context of a description of ESP, 
which is covered in Section 20.3. Here we provide a brief overview.

20.1 / IP SECURITY OVERVIEW 667
TRANSPORT MODE Transport mode provides protection primarily for upper-layer 
protocols. That is, transport mode protection extends to the payload of an IP 
packet.1 Examples include a TCP or UDP segment or an ICMP packet, all of which 
operate directly above IP in a host protocol stack. Typically, transport mode is used 
for end-to-end communication between two hosts (e.g., a client and a server, or two 
workstations). When a host runs AH or ESP over IPv4, the payload is the data that 
normally follow the IP header. For IPv6, the payload is the data that normally fol-
low both the IP header and any IPv6 extensions headers that are present, with the 
possible exception of the destination options header, which may be included in the 
protection.
ESP in transport mode encrypts and optionally authenticates the IP payload 
but not the IP header. AH in transport mode authenticates the IP payload and 
 selected portions of the IP header.
TUNNEL MODE Tunnel mode provides protection to the entire IP packet. To achieve 
this, after the AH or ESP fields are added to the IP packet, the entire packet plus 
security fields is treated as the payload of new outer IP packet with a new outer 
IP header. The entire original, inner, packet travels through a tunnel from one 
point of an IP network to another; no routers along the way are able to examine 
the inner IP header. Because the original packet is encapsulated, the new, larger 
packet may have totally different source and destination addresses, adding to the 
security. Tunnel mode is used when one or both ends of a security association (SA) 
are a security gateway, such as a firewall or router that implements IPsec. With tun-
nel mode, a number of hosts on networks behind firewalls may engage in secure 
communications without implementing IPsec. The unprotected packets generated 
by such hosts are tunneled through external networks by tunnel mode SAs set up 
by the IPsec software in the firewall or secure router at the boundary of the local 
network.
Here is an example of how tunnel mode IPsec operates. Host A on a network 
generates an IP packet with the destination address of host B on another network. 
This packet is routed from the originating host to a firewall or secure router at the 
boundary of A’s network. The firewall filters all outgoing packets to determine the 
need for IPsec processing. If this packet from A to B requires IPsec, the firewall 
performs IPsec processing and encapsulates the packet with an outer IP header. 
The source IP address of this outer IP packet is this firewall, and the destination 
address may be a firewall that forms the boundary to B’s local network. This packet 
is now routed to B’s firewall, with intermediate routers examining only the outer IP 
header. At B’s firewall, the outer IP header is stripped off, and the inner packet is 
delivered to B.
ESP in tunnel mode encrypts and optionally authenticates the entire inner IP 
packet, including the inner IP header. AH in tunnel mode authenticates the entire 
inner IP packet and selected portions of the outer IP header.
Table 20.1 summarizes transport and tunnel mode functionality.
1In this chapter, the term IP packet refers to either an IPv4 datagram or an IPv6 packet.

668  CHAPTER 20 / IP SECURITY
 20.2 IP SECURITY POLICY
Fundamental to the operation of IPsec is the concept of a security policy  applied 
to each IP packet that transits from a source to a destination. IPsec policy is 
 determined primarily by the interaction of two databases, the security association 
 database (SAD) and the security policy database (SPD). This section provides an 
overview of these two databases and then summarizes their use during IPsec opera-
tion. Figure 20.2 illustrates the relevant relationships.
Security Associations
A key concept that appears in both the authentication and confidentiality mecha-
nisms for IP is the security association (SA). An association is a one-way logical 
connection between a sender and a receiver that affords security services to the traf-
fic carried on it. If a peer relationship is needed for two-way secure exchange, then 
two security associations are required.
A security association is uniquely identified by three parameters.
 
■Security Parameters Index (SPI): A 32-bit unsigned integer assigned to this 
SA and having local significance only. The SPI is carried in AH and ESP head-
ers to enable the receiving system to select the SA under which a received 
packet will be processed.
 
■IP Destination Address: This is the address of the destination endpoint of the 
SA, which may be an end-user system or a network system such as a firewall 
or router.
 
■Security Protocol Identifier: This field from the outer IP header indicates 
whether the association is an AH or ESP security association.
Hence, in any IP packet, the security association is uniquely identified by the 
Destination Address in the IPv4 or IPv6 header and the SPI in the enclosed exten-
sion header (AH or ESP).
Transport Mode SA
Tunnel Mode SA
AH
Authenticates IP payload and selected 
portions of IP header and IPv6 
extension headers.
Authenticates entire inner IP packet (inner 
header plus IP payload) plus selected portions 
of outer IP header and outer IPv6 extension 
headers.
ESP
Encrypts IP payload and any IPv6 
extension headers following the ESP 
header.
Encrypts entire inner IP packet.
ESP with 
Authentication
Encrypts IP payload and any IPv6 
extension headers following the ESP 
header. Authenticates IP payload but 
not IP header.
Encrypts entire inner IP packet. Authenticates 
inner IP packet.
Table 20.1 Tunnel Mode and Transport Mode Functionality

20.2 / IP SECURITY POLICY 669
Security Association Database
In each IPsec implementation, there is a nominal2 Security Association Database 
that defines the parameters associated with each SA. A security association is nor-
mally defined by the following parameters in an SAD entry.
 
■Security Parameter Index: A 32-bit value selected by the receiving end of an 
SA to uniquely identify the SA. In an SAD entry for an outbound SA, the SPI 
is used to construct the packet’s AH or ESP header. In an SAD entry for an 
inbound SA, the SPI is used to map traffic to the appropriate SA.
 
■Sequence Number Counter: A 32-bit value used to generate the Sequence 
Number field in AH or ESP headers, described in Section 20.3 (required for all 
implementations).
 
■Sequence Counter Overflow: A flag indicating whether overflow of the 
Sequence Number Counter should generate an auditable event and prevent 
further transmission of packets on this SA (required for all implementations).
 
■Anti-Replay Window: Used to determine whether an inbound AH or ESP 
packet is a replay, described in Section 20.3 (required for all implementations).
 
■AH Information: Authentication algorithm, keys, key lifetimes, and related 
parameters being used with AH (required for AH implementations).
 
■ESP Information: Encryption and authentication algorithm, keys, initialization 
values, key lifetimes, and related parameters being used with ESP  (required 
for ESP implementations).
 
■Lifetime of this Security Association: A time interval or byte count after 
which an SA must be replaced with a new SA (and new SPI) or terminated, 
plus an indication of which of these actions should occur (required for all 
implementations).
2Nominal in the sense that the functionality provided by a Security Association Database must be present 
in any IPsec implementation, but the way in which that functionality is provided is up to the implementer.
Figure 20.2 IPsec Architecture
SPD
SPD
SAD
IKEv2
IKEv2
IPsecv3
IPsecv3
Security
association
database
Key exchange
IKE SA
IPsec SA Pair
ESP protects data
Security
association
database
Security
policy
database
Security
policy
database
SAD

670  CHAPTER 20 / IP SECURITY
 
■IPsec Protocol Mode: Tunnel, transport, or wildcard.
 
■Path MTU: Any observed path maximum transmission unit (maximum size of 
a packet that can be transmitted without fragmentation) and aging variables 
(required for all implementations).
The key management mechanism that is used to distribute keys is coupled to 
the authentication and privacy mechanisms only by way of the Security Parameters 
Index (SPI). Hence, authentication and privacy have been specified independent of 
any specific key management mechanism.
IPsec provides the user with considerable flexibility in the way in which IPsec 
services are applied to IP traffic. As we will see later, SAs can be combined in a 
number of ways to yield the desired user configuration. Furthermore, IPsec pro-
vides a high degree of granularity in discriminating between traffic that is afforded 
IPsec protection and traffic that is allowed to bypass IPsec, as in the former case 
relating IP traffic to specific SAs.
Security Policy Database
The means by which IP traffic is related to specific SAs (or no SA in the case of traffic 
allowed to bypass IPsec) is the nominal Security Policy Database (SPD). In its simplest 
form, an SPD contains entries, each of which defines a subset of IP traffic and points 
to an SA for that traffic. In more complex environments, there may be multiple entries 
that potentially relate to a single SA or multiple SAs associated with a single SPD 
entry. The reader is referred to the relevant IPsec documents for a full discussion.
Each SPD entry is defined by a set of IP and upper-layer protocol field values, 
called selectors. In effect, these selectors are used to filter outgoing traffic in order 
to map it into a particular SA. Outbound processing obeys the following general 
sequence for each IP packet.
1. Compare the values of the appropriate fields in the packet (the selector fields) 
against the SPD to find a matching SPD entry, which will point to zero or more SAs.
2. Determine the SA if any for this packet and its associated SPI.
3. Do the required IPsec processing (i.e., AH or ESP processing).
The following selectors determine an SPD entry:
 
■Remote IP Address: This may be a single IP address, an enumerated list or 
range of addresses, or a wildcard (mask) address. The latter two are required to 
support more than one destination system sharing the same SA (e.g., behind 
a firewall).
 
■Local IP Address: This may be a single IP address, an enumerated list or range 
of addresses, or a wildcard (mask) address. The latter two are required to sup-
port more than one source system sharing the same SA (e.g., behind a firewall).
 
■Next Layer Protocol: The IP protocol header (IPv4, IPv6, or IPv6 Extension) 
includes a field (Protocol for IPv4, Next Header for IPv6 or IPv6 Extension) 
that designates the protocol operating over IP. This is an individual protocol 
number, ANY, or for IPv6 only, OPAQUE. If AH or ESP is used, then this IP 
protocol header immediately precedes the AH or ESP header in the packet.

20.2 / IP SECURITY POLICY 671
 
■Name: A user identifier from the operating system. This is not a field in the IP 
or upper-layer headers but is available if IPsec is running on the same operat-
ing system as the user.
 
■Local and Remote Ports: These may be individual TCP or UDP port values, an 
enumerated list of ports, or a wildcard port.
Table 20.2 provides an example of an SPD on a host system (as opposed to 
a network system such as a firewall or router). This table reflects the following 
configuration: A local network configuration consists of two networks. The basic 
corporate network configuration has the IP network number 1.2.3.0/24. The local 
configuration also includes a secure LAN, often known as a DMZ, that is identified 
as 1.2.4.0/24. The DMZ is protected from both the outside world and the rest of the 
corporate LAN by firewalls. The host in this example has the IP address 1.2.3.10, 
and it is authorized to connect to the server 1.2.4.10 in the DMZ.
The entries in the SPD should be self-explanatory. For example, UDP port 
500 is the designated port for IKE. Any traffic from the local host to a remote host 
for purposes of an IKE exchange bypasses the IPsec processing.
IP Traffic Processing
IPsec is executed on a packet-by-packet basis. When IPsec is implemented, each 
outbound IP packet is processed by the IPsec logic before transmission, and each 
inbound packet is processed by the IPsec logic after reception and before passing 
the packet contents on to the next higher layer (e.g., TCP or UDP). We look at the 
logic of these two situations in turn.
OUTBOUND PACKETS Figure 20.3 highlights the main elements of IPsec processing 
for outbound traffic. A block of data from a higher layer, such as TCP, is passed 
down to the IP layer and an IP packet is formed, consisting of an IP header and an 
IP body. Then the  following steps occur:
1. IPsec searches the SPD for a match to this packet.
2. If no match is found, then the packet is discarded and an error message is generated.
Protocol
Local IP
Port
Remote IP
Port
Action
Comment
UDP
1.2.3.101
500
*
500
BYPASS
IKE
ICMP
1.2.3.101
*
*
*
BYPASS
Error messages
*
1.2.3.101
*
1.2.3.0/24
*
PROTECT: ESP 
intransport-mode
Encrypt intranet traffic
TCP
1.2.3.101
*
1.2.4.10
80
PROTECT: ESP 
intransport-mode
Encrypt to server
TCP
1.2.3.101
*
1.2.4.10
443
BYPASS
TLS: avoid double encryption
*
1.2.3.101
*
1.2.4.0/24
*
DISCARD
Others in DMZ
*
1.2.3.101
*
*
*
BYPASS
Internet
Table 20.2 Host SPD Example

672  CHAPTER 20 / IP SECURITY
3. If a match is found, further processing is determined by the first matching 
entry in the SPD. If the policy for this packet is DISCARD, then the packet is 
discarded. If the policy is BYPASS, then there is no further IPsec processing; 
the packet is forwarded to the network for transmission.
4. If the policy is PROTECT, then a search is made of the SAD for a matching 
entry. If no entry is found, then IKE is invoked to create an SA with the ap-
propriate keys and an entry is made in the SA.
5. The matching entry in the SAD determines the processing for this packet. 
Either encryption, authentication, or both can be performed, and either trans-
port or tunnel mode can be used. The packet is then forwarded to the network 
for transmission.
INBOUND PACKETS Figure 20.4 highlights the main elements of IPsec processing for 
inbound traffic. An incoming IP packet triggers the IPsec processing. The following 
steps occur:
1. IPsec determines whether this is an unsecured IP packet or one that has ESP 
or AH headers/trailers, by examining the IP Protocol field (IPv4) or Next 
Header field (IPv6).
Figure 20.3 Processing Model for Outbound Packets
Search
security policy
database
Search
security association
database
Determine
policy
Outbound IP packet
(e.g., from TCP or UDP)
Discard
packet
No match
found
No match
found
Match found
Match
found
DISCARD
PROTECT
BYPASS
Forward
packet via
IP
Internet
key
exchange
Process
(AH/ESP)

20.3 / ENCAPSULATING SECURITY PAYLOAD 673
2. If the packet is unsecured, IPsec searches the SPD for a match to this packet. 
If the first matching entry has a policy of BYPASS, the IP header is processed 
and stripped off and the packet body is delivered to the next higher layer, such 
as TCP. If the first matching entry has a policy of PROTECT or DISCARD, or 
if there is no matching entry, the packet is discarded.
3. For a secured packet, IPsec searches the SAD. If no match is found, the packet 
is discarded. Otherwise, IPsec applies the appropriate ESP or AH processing. 
Then, the IP header is processed and stripped off and the packet body is deliv-
ered to the next higher layer, such as TCP.
 20.3 ENCAPSULATING SECURITY PAYLOAD
ESP can be used to provide confidentiality, data origin authentication, connection-
less integrity, an anti-replay service (a form of partial sequence integrity), and (lim-
ited) traffic flow confidentiality. The set of services provided depends on options 
selected at the time of Security Association (SA) establishment and on the location 
of the implementation in a network topology.
ESP can work with a variety of encryption and authentication algorithms, in-
cluding authenticated encryption algorithms such as GCM.
Figure 20.4 Processing Model for Inbound Packets
Search
security policy
database
Search
security association
database
Packet
type
Inbound IP packet
(from Internet)
Discard
packet
No match
found
c
e
s
P
I
P
I
Not
BYPASS
Match
found
BYPASS
Deliver packet
to higher layer
(e.g., TCP, UDP)
Process
(AH/ESP)

674  CHAPTER 20 / IP SECURITY
ESP Format
Figure 20.5a shows the top-level format of an ESP packet. It contains the following fields.
 
■Security Parameters Index (32 bits): Identifies a security association.
 
■Sequence Number (32 bits): A monotonically increasing counter value; this 
provides an anti-replay function, as discussed for AH.
 
■Payload Data (variable): This is a transport-level segment (transport mode) or 
IP packet (tunnel mode) that is protected by encryption.
 
■Padding (0–255 bytes): The purpose of this field is discussed later.
 
■Pad Length (8 bits): Indicates the number of pad bytes immediately preceding 
this field.
 
■Next Header (8 bits): Identifies the type of data contained in the payload data 
field by identifying the first header in that payload (e.g., an extension header 
in IPv6, or an upper-layer protocol such as TCP).
 
■Integrity Check Value (variable): A variable-length field (must be an integral 
number of 32-bit words) that contains the Integrity Check Value computed 
over the ESP packet minus the Authentication Data field.
Figure 20.5 ESP Packet Format
Security parameters index (SPI)
32 bits
Sequence number 
Padding (0–255 bytes)
Pad length
Next header
Payload data (variable)
Integrity check value - ICV (variable)
ICV coverage
Encrypted
Encrypted
(a)  Top-level format of an ESP Packet
(b)  Substructure of payload data
Security parameters index (SPI)
Sequence number 
Initialization value - IV (optional)
Padding (0–255 bytes)
TFC padding (optional, variable)
Pad length
Next header
Rest of payload data (variable)
Integrity check value - ICV (variable)
ICV coverage
Payload

20.3 / ENCAPSULATING SECURITY PAYLOAD 675
When any combined mode algorithm is employed, the algorithm itself is ex-
pected to return both decrypted plaintext and a pass/fail indication for the integrity 
check. For combined mode algorithms, the ICV that would normally appear at the 
end of the ESP packet (when integrity is selected) may be omitted. When the ICV 
is omitted and integrity is selected, it is the responsibility of the combined mode 
algorithm to encode within the Payload Data an ICV-equivalent means of verifying 
the integrity of the packet.
Two additional fields may be present in the payload (Figure 20.5b). 
An  initialization value (IV), or nonce, is present if this is required by the encryption 
or authenticated encryption algorithm used for ESP. If tunnel mode is being used, 
then the IPsec implementation may add traffic flow confidentiality (TFC) padding 
after the Payload Data and before the Padding field, as explained subsequently.
Encryption and Authentication Algorithms
The Payload Data, Padding, Pad Length, and Next Header fields are encrypted by 
the ESP service. If the algorithm used to encrypt the payload requires cryptographic 
synchronization data, such as an initialization vector (IV), then these data may be 
carried explicitly at the beginning of the Payload Data field. If included, an IV is 
usually not encrypted, although it is often referred to as being part of the ciphertext.
The ICV field is optional. It is present only if the integrity service is selected 
and is provided by either a separate integrity algorithm or a combined mode algo-
rithm that uses an ICV. The ICV is computed after the encryption is performed. 
This order of processing facilitates rapid detection and rejection of replayed or 
bogus packets by the receiver prior to decrypting the packet, hence potentially re-
ducing the impact of denial of service (DoS) attacks. It also allows for the possibility 
of parallel processing of packets at the receiver that is decryption can take place in 
parallel with integrity checking. Note that because the ICV is not protected by en-
cryption, a keyed integrity algorithm must be employed to compute the ICV.
Padding
The Padding field serves several purposes:
 
■If an encryption algorithm requires the plaintext to be a multiple of some 
number of bytes (e.g., the multiple of a single block for a block cipher), the 
Padding field is used to expand the plaintext (consisting of the Payload Data, 
Padding, Pad Length, and Next Header fields) to the required length.
 
■The ESP format requires that the Pad Length and Next Header fields be right 
aligned within a 32-bit word. Equivalently, the ciphertext must be an integer 
multiple of 32 bits. The Padding field is used to assure this alignment.
 
■Additional padding may be added to provide partial traffic-flow confidential-
ity by concealing the actual length of the payload.
Anti-Replay Service
A replay attack is one in which an attacker obtains a copy of an authenticated 
packet and later transmits it to the intended destination. The receipt of duplicate, 
authenticated IP packets may disrupt service in some way or may have some other 

676  CHAPTER 20 / IP SECURITY
undesired consequence. The Sequence Number field is designed to thwart such at-
tacks. First, we discuss sequence number generation by the sender, and then we 
look at how it is processed by the recipient.
When a new SA is established, the sender initializes a sequence number 
 counter to 0. Each time that a packet is sent on this SA, the sender increments the 
counter and places the value in the Sequence Number field. Thus, the first value to 
be used is 1. If anti-replay is enabled (the default), the sender must not allow the 
sequence number to cycle past 232 - 1 back to zero. Otherwise, there would be mul-
tiple valid packets with the same sequence number. If the limit of 232 - 1 is reached, 
the sender should terminate this SA and negotiate a new SA with a new key.
Because IP is a connectionless, unreliable service, the protocol does not guar-
antee that packets will be delivered in order and does not guarantee that all packets 
will be delivered. Therefore, the IPsec authentication document dictates that the 
receiver should implement a window of size W, with a default of W = 64. The right 
edge of the window represents the highest sequence number, N, so far received for a 
valid packet. For any packet with a sequence number in the range from N - W + 1 
to N that has been correctly received (i.e., properly authenticated), the correspond-
ing slot in the window is marked (Figure 20.6). Inbound processing proceeds as fol-
lows when a packet is received:
1. If the received packet falls within the window and is new, the MAC is checked. 
If the packet is authenticated, the corresponding slot in the window is marked.
2. If the received packet is to the right of the window and is new, the MAC is 
checked. If the packet is authenticated, the window is advanced so that this 
sequence number is the right edge of the window, and the corresponding slot 
in the window is marked.
3. If the received packet is to the left of the window or if authentication fails, the 
packet is discarded; this is an auditable event.
Transport and Tunnel Modes
Figure 20.7 shows two ways in which the IPsec ESP service can be used. In the upper 
part of the figure, encryption (and optionally authentication) is provided directly be-
tween two hosts. Figure 20.7b shows how tunnel mode operation can be used to set up 
Figure 20.6 Anti-replay Mechanism
Fixed window size W
N
N + 1
N – W
Marked if valid
packet received
Unmarked if valid
packet not yet received
   
Advance window if
valid packet to the
right is received

20.3 / ENCAPSULATING SECURITY PAYLOAD 677
a virtual private network. In this example, an organization has four private networks 
interconnected across the Internet. Hosts on the internal networks use the Internet 
for transport of data but do not interact with other Internet-based hosts. By terminat-
ing the tunnels at the security gateway to each internal network, the configuration al-
lows the hosts to avoid implementing the security capability. The former technique is 
supported by a transport mode SA, while the latter technique uses a tunnel mode SA.
In this section, we look at the scope of ESP for the two modes. The consid-
erations are somewhat different for IPv4 and IPv6. We use the packet formats of 
Figure 20.8a as a starting point.
TRANSPORT MODE ESP Transport mode ESP is used to encrypt and optionally au-
thenticate the data carried by IP (e.g., a TCP segment), as shown in Figure 20.8b. 
For this mode using IPv4, the ESP header is inserted into the IP packet immedi-
ately prior to the transport-layer header (e.g., TCP, UDP, ICMP), and an ESP 
trailer (Padding, Pad Length, and Next Header fields) is placed after the IP packet. 
If authentication is selected, the ESP Authentication Data field is added after the 
ESP trailer. The entire transport-level segment plus the ESP trailer are encrypted. 
Authentication covers all of the ciphertext plus the ESP header.
In the context of IPv6, ESP is viewed as an end-to-end payload; that is, it is 
not examined or processed by intermediate routers. Therefore, the ESP header ap-
pears after the IPv6 base header and the hop-by-hop, routing, and fragment exten-
sion headers. The destination options extension header could appear before or after 
the ESP header, depending on the semantics desired. For IPv6, encryption covers 
Figure 20.7 Transport-Mode versus Tunnel-Mode Encryptionx
Internal
Network
External
Network
Encrypted
TCP Session
(a) Transport-level security
Internet
Corporate
network
Corporate
network
Corporate
network
Corporate
network
(b) A virtual private network via tunnel mode
Encrypted tunnels
carrying IP traffic

678  CHAPTER 20 / IP SECURITY
the entire transport-level segment plus the ESP trailer plus the destination options 
extension header if it occurs after the ESP header. Again, authentication covers the 
ciphertext plus the ESP header.
Transport mode operation may be summarized as follows.
1. At the source, the block of data consisting of the ESP trailer plus the entire 
transport-layer segment is encrypted and the plaintext of this block is replaced 
Figure 20.8 Scope of ESP Encryption and Authentication
Orig IP
hdr
Hop-by-hop, dest,
routing, fragment
IPv6
Orig IP
hdr
IPv4
New IP
hdr
IPv4
(b) Transport Mode
New IP
hdr
Ext
headers
IPv6
authenticated
encrypted
authenticated
encrypted
authenticated
encrypted
authenticated
encrypted
(c) Tunnel Mode
Orig IP
hdr
Ext
headers
TCP
Data
ESP
trlr
ESP
auth
ESP
hdr
ESP
auth
Orig IP
hdr
TCP
Data
ESP
trlr
ESP
auth
ESP
hdr
Dest
TCP
Data
TCP
Data
ESP
trlr
ESP
auth
ESP
trlr
ESP
hdr
ESP
hdr
Orig IP
hdr
Extension headers
(if present)
TCP
Data
IPv6
Orig IP
hdr
TCP
Data
IPv4
(a) Before Applying ESP

20.3 / ENCAPSULATING SECURITY PAYLOAD 679
with its ciphertext to form the IP packet for transmission. Authentication is 
added if this option is selected.
2. The packet is then routed to the destination. Each intermediate router needs 
to examine and process the IP header plus any plaintext IP extension headers 
but does not need to examine the ciphertext.
3. The destination node examines and processes the IP header plus any plaintext 
IP extension headers. Then, on the basis of the SPI in the ESP header, the 
destination node decrypts the remainder of the packet to recover the plaintext 
transport-layer segment.
Transport mode operation provides confidentiality for any application that 
uses it, thus avoiding the need to implement confidentiality in every individual ap-
plication. One drawback to this mode is that it is possible to do traffic analysis on 
the transmitted packets.
TUNNEL MODE ESP Tunnel mode ESP is used to encrypt an entire IP packet (Figure 
20.8c). For this mode, the ESP header is prefixed to the packet and then the packet 
plus the ESP trailer is encrypted. This method can be used to counter traffic analysis.
Because the IP header contains the destination address and possibly source 
routing directives and hop-by-hop option information, it is not possible simply to 
transmit the encrypted IP packet prefixed by the ESP header. Intermediate routers 
would be unable to process such a packet. Therefore, it is necessary to encapsulate 
the entire block (ESP header plus ciphertext plus Authentication Data, if present) 
with a new IP header that will contain sufficient information for routing but not for 
traffic analysis.
Whereas the transport mode is suitable for protecting connections between 
hosts that support the ESP feature, the tunnel mode is useful in a configuration that 
includes a firewall or other sort of security gateway that protects a trusted network 
from external networks. In this latter case, encryption occurs only between an exter-
nal host and the security gateway or between two security gateways. This relieves 
hosts on the internal network of the processing burden of encryption and simplifies 
the key distribution task by reducing the number of needed keys. Further, it thwarts 
traffic analysis based on ultimate destination.
Consider a case in which an external host wishes to communicate with a host 
on an internal network protected by a firewall, and in which ESP is implemented 
in the external host and the firewalls. The following steps occur for transfer of a 
transport-layer segment from the external host to the internal host.
1. The source prepares an inner IP packet with a destination address of the target 
internal host. This packet is prefixed by an ESP header; then the packet and 
ESP trailer are encrypted and Authentication Data may be added. The result-
ing block is encapsulated with a new IP header (base header plus optional ex-
tensions such as routing and hop-by-hop options for IPv6) whose destination 
address is the firewall; this forms the outer IP packet.
2. The outer packet is routed to the destination firewall. Each intermediate 
router needs to examine and process the outer IP header plus any outer IP 
extension headers but does not need to examine the ciphertext.

680  CHAPTER 20 / IP SECURITY
3. The destination firewall examines and processes the outer IP header plus any 
outer IP extension headers. Then, on the basis of the SPI in the ESP header, the 
destination node decrypts the remainder of the packet to recover the plaintext 
inner IP packet. This packet is then transmitted in the internal network.
4. The inner packet is routed through zero or more routers in the internal net-
work to the destination host.
Figure 20.9 shows the protocol architecture for the two modes.
Figure 20.9 Protocol Operation for ESP
Data
Data
TCP
hdr
Data
TCP
hdr
Data
Orig IP
hdr
TCP
hdr
Data
ESP
trlr
ESP
hdr
Orig IP
hdr
ESP
auth
New IP
hdr
TCP
hdr
Data
ESP
trlr
ESP
hdr
Orig IP
hdr
ESP
auth
TCP
hdr
Data
Orig IP
hdr
TCP
hdr
Data
Orig IP
hdr
TCP
hdr
Data
(a) Transport mode
(b) Tunnel mode
ESP
trlr
ESP
hdr
ESP
auth
Application
TCP
IP
IPsec
Application
TCP
IP
IPsec
IP

20.4 / COMBINING SECURITY ASSOCIATIONS 681
 20.4 COMBINING SECURITY ASSOCIATIONS
An individual SA can implement either the AH or ESP protocol but not both. 
Sometimes a particular traffic flow will call for the services provided by both AH 
and ESP. Further, a particular traffic flow may require IPsec services between hosts 
and, for that same flow, separate services between security gateways, such as fire-
walls. In all of these cases, multiple SAs must be employed for the same traffic flow 
to achieve the desired IPsec services. The term security association bundle refers to 
a sequence of SAs through which traffic must be processed to provide a desired set 
of IPsec services. The SAs in a bundle may terminate at different endpoints or at 
the same endpoints.
Security associations may be combined into bundles in two ways:
 
■Transport adjacency: Refers to applying more than one security protocol to 
the same IP packet without invoking tunneling. This approach to combining 
AH and ESP allows for only one level of combination; further nesting yields 
no added benefit since the processing is performed at one IPsec instance: the 
(ultimate) destination.
 
■Iterated tunneling: Refers to the application of multiple layers of security pro-
tocols effected through IP tunneling. This approach allows for multiple levels 
of nesting, since each tunnel can originate or terminate at a different IPsec site 
along the path.
The two approaches can be combined, for example, by having a transport SA be-
tween hosts travel part of the way through a tunnel SA between security gateways.
One interesting issue that arises when considering SA bundles is the order in 
which authentication and encryption may be applied between a given pair of end-
points and the ways of doing so. We examine that issue next. Then we look at com-
binations of SAs that involve at least one tunnel.
Authentication Plus Confidentiality
Encryption and authentication can be combined in order to transmit an IP packet 
that has both confidentiality and authentication between hosts. We look at several 
approaches.
ESP WITH AUTHENTICATION OPTION This approach is illustrated in Figure 20.8. 
In this approach, the user first applies ESP to the data to be protected and then 
 appends the authentication data field. There are actually two subcases:
 
■Transport mode ESP: Authentication and encryption apply to the IP payload 
delivered to the host, but the IP header is not protected.
 
■Tunnel mode ESP: Authentication applies to the entire IP packet delivered 
to the outer IP destination address (e.g., a firewall), and authentication is per-
formed at that destination. The entire inner IP packet is protected by the pri-
vacy mechanism for delivery to the inner IP destination.
For both cases, authentication applies to the ciphertext rather than the plaintext.

682  CHAPTER 20 / IP SECURITY
TRANSPORT ADJACENCY Another way to apply authentication after encryption is to 
use two bundled transport SAs, with the inner being an ESP SA and the outer being 
an AH SA. In this case, ESP is used without its authentication option. Because the 
inner SA is a transport SA, encryption is applied to the IP payload. The resulting 
packet consists of an IP header (and possibly IPv6 header extensions) followed by 
an ESP. AH is then applied in transport mode, so that authentication covers the 
ESP plus the original IP header (and extensions) except for mutable fields. The 
advantage of this approach over simply using a single ESP SA with the ESP authen-
tication option is that the authentication covers more fields, including the source 
and destination IP addresses. The disadvantage is the overhead of two SAs versus 
one SA.
TRANSPORT-TUNNEL BUNDLE The use of authentication prior to encryption might 
be preferable for several reasons. First, because the authentication data are pro-
tected by encryption, it is impossible for anyone to intercept the message and alter 
the authentication data without detection. Second, it may be desirable to store the 
authentication information with the message at the destination for later reference. 
It is more convenient to do this if the authentication information applies to the un-
encrypted message; otherwise the message would have to be reencrypted to verify 
the authentication information.
One approach to applying authentication before encryption between two hosts 
is to use a bundle consisting of an inner AH transport SA and an outer ESP tunnel 
SA. In this case, authentication is applied to the IP payload plus the IP header (and 
extensions) except for mutable fields. The resulting IP packet is then processed in 
tunnel mode by ESP; the result is that the entire, authenticated inner packet is en-
crypted and a new outer IP header (and extensions) is added.
Basic Combinations of Security Associations
The IPsec Architecture document lists four examples of combinations of SAs that 
must be supported by compliant IPsec hosts (e.g., workstation, server) or security 
gateways (e.g., firewall, router). These are illustrated in Figure 20.10. The lower 
part of each case in the figure represents the physical connectivity of the elements; 
the upper part represents logical connectivity via one or more nested SAs. Each SA 
can be either AH or ESP. For host-to-host SAs, the mode may be either transport 
or tunnel; otherwise it must be tunnel mode.
Case 1. All security is provided between end systems that implement IPsec. 
For any two end systems to communicate via an SA, they must share the appropri-
ate secret keys. Among the possible combinations are
a. AH in transport mode
b. ESP in transport mode
c. ESP followed by AH in transport mode (an ESP SA inside an AH SA)
d. Any one of a, b, or c inside an AH or ESP in tunnel mode
We have already discussed how these various combinations can be used to 
support authentication, encryption, authentication before encryption, and authenti-
cation after encryption.

20.4 / COMBINING SECURITY ASSOCIATIONS 683
Figure 20.10 Basic Combinations of Security Associations
Internet
Tunnel SA
One or Two SAs
Local
Intranet
Local
Intranet
Host*
Host*
Security
Gateway*
Security
Gateway*
(c) Case 3
Internet
Tunnel SA
Local
Intranet
Local
Intranet
Host
Host
Security
Gateway*
Security
Gateway*
(b) Case 2 
* = implements IPsec
Internet
One or More SAs
Local
Intranet
Local
Intranet
Host*
Host*
Router
Router
(a) Case 1
Internet
Local
Intranet
Host*
Host*
Security
Gateway*
(d) Case 4
Tunnel SA
One or Two SAs

684  CHAPTER 20 / IP SECURITY
Case 2. Security is provided only between gateways (routers, firewalls, etc.) 
and no hosts implement IPsec. This case illustrates simple virtual private network 
support. The security architecture document specifies that only a single tunnel SA is 
needed for this case. The tunnel could support AH, ESP, or ESP with the authenti-
cation option. Nested tunnels are not required, because the IPsec services apply to 
the entire inner packet.
Case 3. This builds on case 2 by adding end-to-end security. The same combi-
nations discussed for cases 1 and 2 are allowed here. The gateway-to-gateway tun-
nel provides either authentication, confidentiality, or both for all traffic between 
end systems. When the gateway-to-gateway tunnel is ESP, it also provides a limited 
form of traffic confidentiality. Individual hosts can implement any additional IPsec 
services required for given applications or given users by means of end-to-end SAs.
Case 4. This provides support for a remote host that uses the Internet to reach 
an organization’s firewall and then to gain access to some server or workstation 
behind the firewall. Only tunnel mode is required between the remote host and the 
firewall. As in case 1, one or two SAs may be used between the remote host and the 
local host.
 20.5 INTERNET KEY EXCHANGE
The key management portion of IPsec involves the determination and distribution 
of secret keys. A typical requirement is four keys for communication between two 
applications: transmit and receive pairs for both integrity and confidentiality. The 
IPsec Architecture document mandates support for two types of key management:
 
■Manual: A system administrator manually configures each system with its own 
keys and with the keys of other communicating systems. This is practical for 
small, relatively static environments.
 
■Automated: An automated system enables the on-demand creation of keys for 
SAs and facilitates the use of keys in a large distributed system with an evolv-
ing configuration.
The default automated key management protocol for IPsec is referred to as 
ISAKMP/Oakley and consists of the following elements:
 
■Oakley Key Determination Protocol: Oakley is a key exchange protocol based 
on the Diffie–Hellman algorithm but providing added security. Oakley is ge-
neric in that it does not dictate specific formats.
 
■Internet Security Association and Key Management Protocol (ISAKMP): 
ISAKMP provides a framework for Internet key management and provides 
the specific protocol support, including formats, for negotiation of security 
attributes.
ISAKMP by itself does not dictate a specific key exchange algorithm; rather, 
ISAKMP consists of a set of message types that enable the use of a variety of key 
exchange algorithms. Oakley is the specific key exchange algorithm mandated for 
use with the initial version of ISAKMP.

20.5 / INTERNET KEY EXCHANGE 685
In IKEv2, the terms Oakley and ISAKMP are no longer used, and there 
are significant differences from the use of Oakley and ISAKMP in IKEv1. 
Nevertheless, the basic functionality is the same. In this section, we describe the 
IKEv2 specification.
Key Determination Protocol
IKE key determination is a refinement of the Diffie–Hellman key exchange algo-
rithm. Recall that Diffie–Hellman involves the following interaction between users 
A and B. There is prior agreement on two global parameters: q, a large prime num-
ber; and a, a primitive root of q. A selects a random integer XA as its private key and 
transmits to B its public key ΥA = aXA mod q. Similarly, B selects a random integer 
XB as its private key and transmits to A its public key ΥB = aXB mod q. Each side 
can now compute the secret session key:
 
K = (ΥB)XA mod q = (ΥA)XB mod q = aXAXB mod q 
The Diffie–Hellman algorithm has two attractive features:
 
■Secret keys are created only when needed. There is no need to store secret 
keys for a long period of time, exposing them to increased vulnerability.
 
■The exchange requires no pre-existing infrastructure other than an agreement 
on the global parameters.
However, there are a number of weaknesses to Diffie–Hellman, as pointed out in 
[HUIT98].
 
■It does not provide any information about the identities of the parties.
 
■It is subject to a man-in-the-middle attack, in which a third party C imperson-
ates B while communicating with A and impersonates A while communicating 
with B. Both A and B end up negotiating a key with C, which can then listen to 
and pass on traffic. The man-in-the-middle attack proceeds as
1. B sends his public key YB in a message addressed to A (see Figure 10.2).
2. The enemy (E) intercepts this message. E saves B’s public key and sends a 
message to A that has B’s User ID but E’s public key YE. This message is 
sent in such a way that it appears as though it was sent from B’s host system. 
A receives E’s message and stores E’s public key with B’s User ID. Similarly, 
E sends a message to B with E’s public key, purporting to come from A.
3. B computes a secret key K1 based on B’s private key and YE. A computes 
a secret key K2 based on A’s private key and YE. E computes K1 using E’s 
secret key XE and YB and computers K2 using XE and YA.
4. From now on, E is able to relay messages from A to B and from B to A, 
appropriately changing their encipherment en route in such a way that nei-
ther A nor B will know that they share their communication with E.
 
■It is computationally intensive. As a result, it is vulnerable to a clogging attack, 
in which an opponent requests a high number of keys. The victim spends con-
siderable computing resources doing useless modular exponentiation rather 
than real work.

686  CHAPTER 20 / IP SECURITY
IKE key determination is designed to retain the advantages of Diffie–Hellman, 
while countering its weaknesses.
FEATURES OF IKE KEY DETERMINATION The IKE key determination algorithm is 
characterized by five important features:
1. It employs a mechanism known as cookies to thwart clogging attacks.
2. It enables the two parties to negotiate a group; this, in essence, specifies the 
global parameters of the Diffie–Hellman key exchange.
3. It uses nonces to ensure against replay attacks.
4. It enables the exchange of Diffie–Hellman public key values.
5. It authenticates the Diffie–Hellman exchange to thwart man-in-the-middle 
attacks.
We have already discussed Diffie–Hellman. Let us look at the remainder of 
these elements in turn. First, consider the problem of clogging attacks. In this at-
tack, an opponent forges the source address of a legitimate user and sends a public 
Diffie–Hellman key to the victim. The victim then performs a modular exponentia-
tion to compute the secret key. Repeated messages of this type can clog the vic-
tim’s system with useless work. The cookie exchange requires that each side send 
a pseudorandom number, the cookie, in the initial message, which the other side 
acknowledges. This acknowledgment must be repeated in the first message of the 
Diffie–Hellman key exchange. If the source address was forged, the opponent gets 
no answer. Thus, an opponent can only force a user to generate acknowledgments 
and not to perform the Diffie–Hellman calculation.
IKE mandates that cookie generation satisfy three basic requirements:
1. The cookie must depend on the specific parties. This prevents an attacker from 
obtaining a cookie using a real IP address and UDP port and then using it to 
swamp the victim with requests from randomly chosen IP addresses or ports.
2. It must not be possible for anyone other than the issuing entity to generate 
cookies that will be accepted by that entity. This implies that the issuing entity 
will use local secret information in the generation and subsequent verification 
of a cookie. It must not be possible to deduce this secret information from any 
particular cookie. The point of this requirement is that the issuing entity need 
not save copies of its cookies, which are then more vulnerable to discovery, but 
can verify an incoming cookie acknowledgment when it needs to.
3. The cookie generation and verification methods must be fast to thwart attacks 
intended to sabotage processor resources.
The recommended method for creating the cookie is to perform a fast hash 
(e.g., MD5) over the IP Source and Destination addresses, the UDP Source and 
Destination ports, and a locally generated secret value.
IKE key determination supports the use of different groups for the Diffie–
Hellman key exchange. Each group includes the definition of the two global pa-
rameters and the identity of the algorithm. The current specification includes the 
following groups.

20.5 / INTERNET KEY EXCHANGE 687
 
■Modular exponentiation with a 768-bit modulus
q = 2768 - 2704 - 1 + 264 * (:2638 * p; + 149686)
a = 2
 
■Modular exponentiation with a 1024-bit modulus
q = 21024 - 2960 - 1 + 264 * (:2894 * p; + 129093)
a = 2
 
■Modular exponentiation with a 1536-bit modulus
 
■Parameters to be determined
 
■Elliptic curve group over 2155
 
■Generator (hexadecimal): X = 7B, Y = 1C8
 
■Elliptic curve parameters (hexadecimal): A = 0, Y = 7338F
 
■Elliptic curve group over 2185
 
■Generator (hexadecimal): X = 18, Y = D
 
■Elliptic curve parameters (hexadecimal): A = 0, Y = 1EE9
The first three groups are the classic Diffie–Hellman algorithm using modular 
exponentiation. The last two groups use the elliptic curve analog to Diffie–Hellman, 
which was described in Chapter 10.
IKE key determination employs nonces to ensure against replay attacks. Each 
nonce is a locally generated pseudorandom number. Nonces appear in responses 
and are encrypted during certain portions of the exchange to secure their use.
Three different authentication methods can be used with IKE key determination:
 
■Digital signatures: The exchange is authenticated by signing a mutually ob-
tainable hash; each party encrypts the hash with its private key. The hash is 
generated over important parameters, such as user IDs and nonces.
 
■Public-key encryption: The exchange is authenticated by encrypting param-
eters such as IDs and nonces with the sender’s private key.
 
■Symmetric-key encryption: A key derived by some out-of-band mechanism 
can be used to authenticate the exchange by symmetric encryption of ex-
change parameters.
IKEV2 EXCHANGES The IKEv2 protocol involves the exchange of messages 
in pairs. The first two pairs of exchanges are referred to as the initial exchanges 
(Figure  20.11a). In the first exchange, the two peers exchange information concern-
ing cryptographic algorithms and other security parameters they are willing to use 
along with nonces and Diffie–Hellman (DH) values. The result of this exchange is to 
set up a special SA called the IKE SA (see Figure 20.2). This SA defines parameters 
for a secure channel between the peers over which subsequent message exchanges 
take place. Thus, all subsequent IKE message exchanges are protected by encryp-
tion and message authentication. In the second exchange, the two parties authenti-
cate one another and set up a first IPsec SA to be placed in the SADB and used for 

688  CHAPTER 20 / IP SECURITY
Figure 20.11 IKEv2 Exchanges
HDR, SAi1, KEi, Ni
Responder
Initiator
(a) Initial exchanges
HDR, SAr1, KEr, Nr, [CERTREQ]
HDR, SK {IDi, [CERT,] [CERTREQ,] [IDr,] AUTH, SAi2, TSi, TSr}
HDR, SK {IDr, [CERT,] AUTH, SAr2, TSi, TSr}
HDR, SK {[N], SA, Ni, [KEi], [TSi, TSr]}
(b) CREATE_CHILD_SA exchange
HDR, SK {SA, Nr, [KEr], [TSi, TSr]}
HDR, SK {[N,] [D,] [CP,] ...}
(c) Informational exchange
HDR, SK {[N,] [D,] [CP], ...}
HDR = IKE header
SAx1 = offered and chosen algorithms, DH group
KEx = Diffie–Hellman public key
Nx= nonces
CERTREQ = Certificate request
IDx = identity
CERT = certificate
SK {...} = MAC and encrypt
AUTH = Authentication
SAx2 = algorithms, parameters for IPsec SA
TSx = traffic selectors for IPsec SA
N = Notify
D = Delete
CP = Configuration
protecting ordinary (i.e. non-IKE) communications between the peers. Thus, four 
messages are needed to establish the first SA for general use.
The CREATE_CHILD_SA exchange can be used to establish further SAs 
for protecting traffic. The informational exchange is used to exchange management 
information, IKEv2 error messages, and other notifications.
Header and Payload Formats
IKE defines procedures and packet formats to establish, negotiate, modify, and de-
lete security associations. As part of SA establishment, IKE defines payloads for 
exchanging key generation and authentication data. These payload formats provide 
a consistent framework independent of the specific key exchange protocol, encryp-
tion algorithm, and authentication mechanism.
IKE HEADER FORMAT An IKE message consists of an IKE header followed by one 
or more payloads. All of this is carried in a transport protocol. The specification dic-
tates that implementations must support the use of UDP for the transport protocol.

20.5 / INTERNET KEY EXCHANGE 689
Figure 20.12a shows the header format for an IKE message. It consists of the 
following fields.
 
■Initiator SPI (64 bits): A value chosen by the initiator to identify a unique IKE 
security association (SA).
 
■Responder SPI (64 bits): A value chosen by the responder to identify a unique 
IKE SA.
 
■Next Payload (8 bits): Indicates the type of the first payload in the message; 
payloads are discussed in the next subsection.
 
■Major Version (4 bits): Indicates major version of IKE in use.
 
■Minor Version (4 bits): Indicates minor version in use.
 
■Exchange Type (8 bits): Indicates the type of exchange; these are discussed 
later in this section.
 
■Flags (8 bits): Indicates specific options set for this IKE exchange. Three bits 
are defined so far. The initiator bit indicates whether this packet is sent by 
the SA initiator. The version bit indicates whether the transmitter is capable 
of using a higher major version number than the one currently indicated. The 
response bit indicates whether this is a response to a message containing the 
same message ID.
 
■Message ID (32 bits): Used to control retransmission of lost packets and 
matching of requests and responses.
 
■Length (32 bits): Length of total message (header plus all payloads) in octets.
IKE PAYLOAD TYPES All IKE payloads begin with the same generic payload header 
shown in Figure 20.12b. The Next Payload field has a value of 0 if this is the last 
Figure 20.12 IKE Formats
MjVer
MnVer
Exchange Type
Flags
Next Payload
Message ID
Length
(a) IKE header
(b) Generic Payload header
Initiator’s Security Parameter Index (SPI)
Responder’s Security Parameter Index (SPI)
0
Bit:
8
16
24
31
RESERVED
Payload Length
Next Payload
C
0
Bit:
8
16
31

690  CHAPTER 20 / IP SECURITY
Type
Parameters
Security Association
Proposals
Key Exchange
DH Group #, Key Exchange Data
Identification
ID Type, ID Data
Certificate
Cert Encoding, Certificate Data
Certificate Request
Cert Encoding, Certification Authority
Authentication
Auth Method, Authentication Data
Nonce
Nonce Data
Notify
Protocol-ID, SPI Size, Notify Message Type, SPI, Notification Data
Delete
Protocol-ID, SPI Size, # of SPIs, SPI (one or more)
Vendor ID
Vendor ID
Traffic Selector
Number of TSs, Traffic Selectors
Encrypted
IV, Encrypted IKE payloads, Padding, Pad Length, ICV
Configuration
CFG Type, Configuration Attributes
Extensible Authentication 
Protocol
EAP Message
Table 20.3 IKE Payload Types
payload in the message; otherwise its value is the type of the next payload. The 
Payload Length field indicates the length in octets of this payload, including the 
generic payload header.
The critical bit is 0 if the sender wants the recipient to skip this payload if it 
does not understand the payload type code in the Next Payload field of the previous 
payload. It is set to 1 if the sender wants the recipient to reject this entire message if 
it does not understand the payload type.
Table 20.3 summarizes the payload types defined for IKE and lists the fields, 
or parameters, that are part of each payload. The SA payload is used to begin the 
establishment of an SA. The payload has a complex, hierarchical structure. The 
payload may contain multiple proposals. Each proposal may contain multiple pro-
tocols. Each protocol may contain multiple transforms. And each transform may 
contain multiple attributes. These elements are formatted as substructures within 
the payload as follows.
 
■Proposal: This substructure includes a proposal number, a protocol ID (AH, 
ESP, or IKE), an indicator of the number of transforms, and then a transform 
substructure. If more than one protocol is to be included in a proposal, then 
there is a subsequent proposal substructure with the same proposal number.
 
■Transform: Different protocols support different transform types. The trans-
forms are used primarily to define cryptographic algorithms to be used with a 
particular protocol.
 
■Attribute: Each transform may include attributes that modify or complete the 
specification of the transform. An example is key length.

20.5 / INTERNET KEY EXCHANGE 691
The Key Exchange payload can be used for a variety of key exchange tech-
niques, including Oakley, Diffie–Hellman, and the RSA-based key exchange used 
by PGP. The Key Exchange data field contains the data required to generate a ses-
sion key and is dependent on the key exchange algorithm used.
The Identification payload is used to determine the identity of communicating 
peers and may be used for determining authenticity of information. Typically the 
ID Data field will contain an IPv4 or IPv6 address.
The Certificate payload transfers a public-key certificate. The Certificate 
Encoding field indicates the type of certificate or certificate-related information, 
which may include the following:
 
■PKCS #7 wrapped X.509 certificate
 
■PGP certificate
 
■DNS signed key
 
■X.509 certificate—signature
 
■X.509 certificate—key exchange
 
■Kerberos tokens
 
■Certificate Revocation List (CRL)
 
■Authority Revocation List (ARL)
 
■SPKI certificate
At any point in an IKE exchange, the sender may include a Certificate Request 
payload to request the certificate of the other communicating entity. The payload 
may list more than one certificate type that is acceptable and more than one certifi-
cate authority that is acceptable.
The Authentication payload contains data used for message authentication 
purposes. The authentication method types so far defined are RSA digital signa-
ture, shared-key message integrity code, and DSS digital signature.
The Nonce payload contains random data used to guarantee liveness during 
an exchange and to protect against replay attacks.
The Notify payload contains either error or status information associated with 
this SA or this SA negotiation. The following table lists the IKE notify messages.
Error Messages
Status Messages
Unsupported Critical
Initial Contact
Payload
Set Window Size
Invalid IKE SPI
Additional TS Possible
Invalid Major Version
IPCOMP Supported
Invalid Syntax
NAT Detection Source IP
Invalid Payload Type
NAT Detection Destination IP
Invalid Message ID
Cookie
Invalid SPI
Use Transport Mode

692  CHAPTER 20 / IP SECURITY
Error Messages
Status Messages
No Proposal Chosen
HTTP Cert Lookup Supported
Invalid KE Payload
Rekey SA
Authentication Failed
ESP TFC Padding Not Supported
Single Pair Required
Non First Fragments Also
No Additional SAS
Internal Address Failure
Failed CP Required
TS Unacceptable
Invalid Selectors
The Delete payload indicates one or more SAs that the sender has deleted 
from its database and that therefore are no longer valid.
The Vendor ID payload contains a vendor-defined constant. The constant is 
used by vendors to identify and recognize remote instances of their implementa-
tions. This mechanism allows a vendor to experiment with new features while main-
taining backward compatibility.
The Traffic Selector payload allows peers to identify packet flows for process-
ing by IPsec services.
The Encrypted payload contains other payloads in encrypted form. The en-
crypted payload format is similar to that of ESP. It may include an IV if the encryp-
tion algorithm requires it and an ICV if authentication is selected.
The Configuration payload is used to exchange configuration information be-
tween IKE peers.
The Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP) payload allows IKE SAs to 
be authenticated using EAP, which was discussed in Chapter 16.
 20.6 CRYPTOGRAPHIC SUITES
The IPsecv3 and IKEv3 protocols rely on a variety of types of cryptographic algo-
rithms. As we have seen in this book, there are many cryptographic algorithms of 
each type, each with a variety of parameters, such as key size. To promote interop-
erability, two RFCs define recommended suites of cryptographic algorithms and 
parameters for various applications.
RFC 4308 defines two cryptographic suites for establishing virtual private net-
works. Suite VPN-A matches the commonly used corporate VPN security used in 
older IKEv1 implementations at the time of the issuance of IKEv2 in 2005. Suite 
VPN-B provides stronger security and is recommended for new VPNs that imple-
ment IPsecv3 and IKEv2.
Table 20.4a lists the algorithms and parameters for the two suites. There are 
several points to note about these two suites. Note that for symmetric cryptography, 
