474  CHAPTER 15 / USER AUTHENTICATION
This chapter examines some of the authentication functions that have been developed 
to support network-based user authentication. The chapter begins with an introduc-
tion to some of the concepts and key considerations for user authentication over a 
network or the Internet. The next section examines user-authentication protocols that 
rely on symmetric encryption. This is followed by a section on one of the earliest and 
also one of the most widely used authentication services: Kerberos. Next, the chapter 
looks at user-authentication protocols that rely on asymmetric encryption. This is fol-
lowed by a discussion of the X.509 user-authentication protocol. Finally, the concept of 
federated identity is introduced.
 15.1 REMOTE USER-AUTHENTICATION PRINCIPLES
In most computer security contexts, user authentication is the fundamental build-
ing block and the primary line of defense. User authentication is the basis for most 
types of access control and for user accountability. RFC 4949 (Internet Security 
Glossary) defines user authentication as the process of verifying an identity claimed 
by or for a system entity. This process consists of two steps:
 
■Identification step: Presenting an identifier to the security system. (Identifiers 
should be assigned carefully, because authenticated identities are the basis for 
other security services, such as access control service.)
 
■Verification step: Presenting or generating authentication information that 
corroborates the binding between the entity and the identifier.
For example, user Alice Toklas could have the user identifier ABTOKLAS. 
This information needs to be stored on any server or computer system that Alice 
wishes to use and could be known to system administrators and other users. 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
 
◆
Understand the distinction between identification and verification.
 
◆
Present an overview of techniques for remote user authentication using 
symmetric encryption.
 
◆
Give a presentation on Kerberos.
 
◆
Explain the differences between versions 4 and 5 of Kerberos.
 
◆
Describe the use of Kerberos in multiple realms.
 
◆
Present an overview of techniques for remote user authentication using 
asymmetric encryption.
 
◆
Understand the need for a federated identity management system.
 
◆
Explain the use of PIV mechanisms as part of a user authentication system.
MODULE 4

15.1 / REMOTE USER-AUTHENTICATION PRINCIPLES 475
A typical item of authentication information associated with this user ID is a pass-
word, which is kept secret (known only to Alice and to the system). If no one is 
able to obtain or guess Alice’s password, then the combination of Alice’s user ID 
and password enables administrators to set up Alice’s access permissions and audit 
her activity. Because Alice’s ID is not secret, system users can send her email, but 
because her password is secret, no one can pretend to be Alice.
In essence, identification is the means by which a user provides a claimed 
identity to the system; user authentication is the means of establishing the validity 
of the claim. Note that user authentication is distinct from message authentication. 
As defined in Chapter 12, message authentication is a procedure that allows com-
municating parties to verify that the contents of a received message have not been 
altered and that the source is authentic. This chapter is concerned solely with user 
authentication.
The NIST Model for Electronic User Authentication
NIST SP 800-63-2 (Electronic Authentication Guideline, August 2013) defines elec-
tronic user authentication as the process of establishing confidence in user identi-
ties that are presented electronically to an information system. Systems can use the 
 authenticated identity to determine if the authenticated individual is authorized to 
 perform particular functions, such as database transactions or access to system re-
sources. In many cases, the authentication and transaction or other authorized function 
takes place across an open network such as the Internet. Equally authentication and 
subsequent authorization can take place locally, such as across a local area network.
SP 800-63-2 defines a general model for user authentication that involves a num-
ber of entities and procedures. We discuss this model with reference to Figure 15.1.
The initial requirement for performing user authentication is that the user 
must be registered with the system. The following is a typical sequence for registra-
tion. An applicant applies to a registration authority (RA) to become a subscriber 
Figure 15.1 The NIST SP 800-63-2 E-Authentication Architectural Model
Registration
authority (RA)
Registration, credential issuance,
and maintenance
E-Authentication using
token and credential
Identity proofing
User registration
Token, credential
Registration/issuance
Authenticated session
Authenticated protocol
Exchange
Authenticated
assertion
Registration
Confirmation
Token/credential
Validation
Relying
party (RP)
Verifier
Subscriber/
claimant
Credential
service
provider (RA)

476  CHAPTER 15 / USER AUTHENTICATION
of a credential service provider (CSP). In this model, the RA is a trusted entity that 
establishes and vouches for the identity of an applicant to a CSP. The CSP then 
engages in an exchange with the subscriber. Depending on the details of the over-
all authentication system, the CSP issues some sort of electronic credential to the 
subscriber. The credential is a data structure that authoritatively binds an identity 
and additional attributes to a token possessed by a subscriber, and can be verified 
when presented to the verifier in an authentication transaction. The token could 
be an encryption key or an encrypted password that identifies the subscriber. The 
token may be issued by the CSP, generated directly by the subscriber, or provided 
by a third party. The token and credential may be used in subsequent authentica-
tion events.
Once a user is registered as a subscriber, the actual authentication process can 
take place between the subscriber and one or more systems that perform authen-
tication and, subsequently, authorization. The party to be authenticated is called a 
claimant and the party verifying that identity is called a verifier. When a claimant 
successfully demonstrates possession and control of a token to a verifier through an 
authentication protocol, the verifier can verify that the claimant is the subscriber 
named in the corresponding credential. The verifier passes on an assertion about the 
identity of the subscriber to the relying party (RP). That assertion includes identity 
information about a subscriber, such as the subscriber name, an identifier assigned 
at registration, or other subscriber attributes that were verified in the registration 
process. The RP can use the authenticated information provided by the verifier to 
make access control or authorization decisions.
An implemented system for authentication will differ from or be more com-
plex than this simplified model, but the model illustrates the key roles and functions 
needed for a secure authentication system.
Means of Authentication
There are four general means of authenticating a user’s identity, which can be used 
alone or in combination:
 
■Something the individual knows: Examples include a password, a personal 
identification number (PIN), or answers to a prearranged set of questions.
 
■Something the individual possesses: Examples include cryptographic keys, 
electronic keycards, smart cards, and physical keys. This type of authenticator 
is referred to as a token.
 
■Something the individual is (static biometrics): Examples include recognition 
by fingerprint, retina, and face.
 
■Something the individual does (dynamic biometrics): Examples include recog-
nition by voice pattern, handwriting characteristics, and typing rhythm.
All of these methods, properly implemented and used, can provide secure 
user authentication. However, each method has problems. An adversary may be 
able to guess or steal a password. Similarly, an adversary may be able to forge or 
steal a token. A user may forget a password or lose a token. Furthermore, there is a 
significant administrative overhead for managing password and token information 
on systems and securing such information on systems. With respect to biometric 

15.1 / REMOTE USER-AUTHENTICATION PRINCIPLES 477
authenticators, there are a variety of problems, including dealing with false positives 
and false negatives, user acceptance, cost, and convenience. For network-based user 
authentication, the most important methods involve cryptographic keys and some-
thing the individual knows, such as a password.
Mutual Authentication
An important application area is that of mutual authentication protocols. Such pro-
tocols enable communicating parties to satisfy themselves mutually about each oth-
er’s identity and to exchange session keys. This topic was examined in Chapter 14. 
There, the focus was key distribution. We return to this topic here to consider the 
wider implications of authentication.
Central to the problem of authenticated key exchange are two issues: confi-
dentiality and timeliness. To prevent masquerade and to prevent compromise of 
session keys, essential identification and session-key information must be commu-
nicated in encrypted form. This requires the prior existence of secret or public keys 
that can be used for this purpose. The second issue, timeliness, is important because 
of the threat of message replays. Such replays, at worst, could allow an opponent to 
compromise a session key or successfully impersonate another party. At minimum, 
a successful replay can disrupt operations by presenting parties with messages that 
appear genuine but are not.
[GONG93] lists the following examples of replay attacks:
1. The simplest replay attack is one in which the opponent simply copies a mes-
sage and replays it later.
2. An opponent can replay a timestamped message within the valid time window. 
If both the original and the replay arrive within then time window, this inci-
dent can be logged.
3. As with example (2), an opponent can replay a timestamped message within 
the valid time window, but in addition, the opponent suppresses the original 
message. Thus, the repetition cannot be detected.
4. Another attack involves a backward replay without modification. This is a re-
play back to the message sender. This attack is possible if symmetric encryp-
tion is used and the sender cannot easily recognize the difference between 
messages sent and messages received on the basis of content.
One approach to coping with replay attacks is to attach a sequence number to 
each message used in an authentication exchange. A new message is accepted only 
if its sequence number is in the proper order. The difficulty with this approach is 
that it requires each party to keep track of the last sequence number for each claim-
ant it has dealt with. Because of this overhead, sequence numbers are generally not 
used for authentication and key exchange. Instead, one of the following two general 
approaches is used:
 
■Timestamps: Party A accepts a message as fresh only if the message contains 
a timestamp that, in A’s judgment, is close enough to A’s knowledge of cur-
rent time. This approach requires that clocks among the various participants 
be synchronized.

478  CHAPTER 15 / USER AUTHENTICATION
 
■Challenge/response: Party A, expecting a fresh message from B, first sends B 
a nonce (challenge) and requires that the subsequent message (response) re-
ceived from B contain the correct nonce value.
It can be argued (e.g., [LAM92a]) that the timestamp approach should not be 
used for connection-oriented applications because of the inherent difficulties with 
this technique. First, some sort of protocol is needed to maintain synchronization 
among the various processor clocks. This protocol must be both fault tolerant, to 
cope with network errors, and secure, to cope with hostile attacks. Second, the oppor-
tunity for a successful attack will arise if there is a temporary loss of synchronization 
resulting from a fault in the clock mechanism of one of the parties. Finally,  because 
of the variable and unpredictable nature of network delays, distributed clocks cannot 
be expected to maintain precise synchronization. Therefore, any timestamp-based 
procedure must allow for a window of time sufficiently large to accommodate net-
work delays yet sufficiently small to minimize the opportunity for attack.
On the other hand, the challenge-response approach is unsuitable for a con-
nectionless type of application, because it requires the overhead of a handshake be-
fore any connectionless transmission, effectively negating the chief characteristic of 
a connectionless transaction. For such applications, reliance on some sort of secure 
time server and a consistent attempt by each party to keep its clocks in synchroniza-
tion may be the best approach (e.g., [LAM92b]).
One-Way Authentication
One application for which encryption is growing in popularity is electronic mail 
(email). The very nature of electronic mail, and its chief benefit, is that it is not nec-
essary for the sender and receiver to be online at the same time. Instead, the email 
message is forwarded to the receiver’s electronic mailbox, where it is buffered until 
the receiver is available to read it.
The “envelope” or header of the email message must be in the clear, so that 
the message can be handled by the store-and-forward email protocol, such as the 
Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP) or X.400. However, it is often desirable that 
the mail-handling protocol not require access to the plaintext form of the message, 
because that would require trusting the mail-handling mechanism. Accordingly, the 
email message should be encrypted such that the mail-handling system is not in 
 possession of the decryption key.
A second requirement is that of authentication. Typically, the recipient wants 
some assurance that the message is from the alleged sender.
 15.2 REMOTE USER-AUTHENTICATION USING 
SYMMETRIC ENCRYPTION
Mutual Authentication
As was discussed in Chapter 14, a two-level hierarchy of symmetric encryption keys 
can be used to provide confidentiality for communication in a distributed environ-
ment. In general, this strategy involves the use of a trusted key distribution center 

482  CHAPTER 15 / USER AUTHENTICATION
One-Way Authentication
Using symmetric encryption, the decentralized key distribution scenario illustrated 
in Figure 14.5 is impractical. This scheme requires the sender to issue a request to 
the intended recipient, await a response that includes a session key, and only then 
send the message.
With some refinement, the KDC strategy illustrated in Figure 14.3 is a can-
didate for encrypted electronic mail. Because we wish to avoid requiring that the 
recipient (B) be on line at the same time as the sender (A), steps 4 and 5 must be 
eliminated. For a message with content M, the sequence is as follows:
1. A S KDC: IDA }IDB }N1
2. KDC S A: E(Ka, [Ks }IDB }N1 }E(Kb, [Ks }IDA])])
3. A S B:      E(Kb, [Ks }IDA]) }E(Ks, M)
This approach guarantees that only the intended recipient of a message will be 
able to read it. It also provides a level of authentication that the sender is A. As 
 specified, the protocol does not protect against replays. Some measure of defense 
could be provided by including a timestamp with the message. However, because 
of the potential delays in the email process, such timestamps may have limited 
usefulness.
 15.3 KERBEROS
Kerberos4 is an authentication service developed as part of Project Athena at MIT. 
The problem that Kerberos addresses is this: Assume an open distributed environ-
ment in which users at workstations wish to access services on servers distributed 
throughout the network. We would like for servers to be able to restrict access to 
authorized users and to be able to authenticate requests for service. In this envi-
ronment, a workstation cannot be trusted to identify its users correctly to network 
services. In particular, the following three threats exist:
1. A user may gain access to a particular workstation and pretend to be another 
user operating from that workstation.
2. A user may alter the network address of a workstation so that the requests 
sent from the altered workstation appear to come from the impersonated 
workstation.
3. A user may eavesdrop on exchanges and use a replay attack to gain entrance 
to a server or to disrupt operations.
In any of these cases, an unauthorized user may be able to gain access to services 
and data that he or she is not authorized to access. Rather than building in elaborate 
4“In Greek mythology, a many headed dog, commonly three, perhaps with a serpent’s tail, the guardian 
of the entrance of Hades.” From Dictionary of Subjects and Symbols in Art, by James Hall, Harper & 
Row, 1979. Just as the Greek Kerberos has three heads, the modern Kerberos was intended to have three 
components to guard a network’s gate: authentication, accounting, and audit. The last two heads were 
never implemented.

15.3 / KERBEROS 483
authentication protocols at each server, Kerberos provides a centralized authenti-
cation server whose function is to authenticate users to servers and servers to users. 
Unlike most other authentication schemes described in this book, Kerberos relies 
exclusively on symmetric encryption, making no use of public-key encryption.
Two versions of Kerberos are in common use. Version 4 [MILL88, STEI88] 
implementations still exist. Version 5 [KOHL94] corrects some of the security defi-
ciencies of version 4 and has been issued as a proposed Internet Standard (RFC 
4120 and RFC 4121).5
We begin this section with a brief discussion of the motivation for the Kerberos 
approach. Then, because of the complexity of Kerberos, it is best to start with a de-
scription of the authentication protocol used in version 4. This enables us to see the 
essence of the Kerberos strategy without considering some of the details required to 
handle subtle security threats. Finally, we examine version 5.
Motivation
If a set of users is provided with dedicated personal computers that have no network 
connections, then a user’s resources and files can be protected by physically secur-
ing each personal computer. When these users instead are served by a centralized 
time-sharing system, the time-sharing operating system must provide the security. 
The operating system can enforce access-control policies based on user identity and 
use the logon procedure to identify users.
Today, neither of these scenarios is typical. More common is a distributed 
architecture consisting of dedicated user workstations (clients) and distributed 
or centralized servers. In this environment, three approaches to security can be 
envisioned.
1. Rely on each individual client workstation to assure the identity of its user or 
users and rely on each server to enforce a security policy based on user iden-
tification (ID).
2. Require that client systems authenticate themselves to servers, but trust the 
client system concerning the identity of its user.
3. Require the user to prove his or her identity for each service invoked. Also 
require that servers prove their identity to clients.
In a small, closed environment in which all systems are owned and operated 
by a single organization, the first or perhaps the second strategy may suffice.6 But 
in a more open environment in which network connections to other machines are 
supported, the third approach is needed to protect user information and resources 
housed at the server. Kerberos supports this third approach. Kerberos assumes a 
distributed client/server architecture and employs one or more Kerberos servers to 
provide an authentication service.
5Versions 1 through 3 were internal development versions. Version 4 is the “original” Kerberos.
6However, even a closed environment faces the threat of attack by a disgruntled employee.

484  CHAPTER 15 / USER AUTHENTICATION
The first published report on Kerberos [STEI88] listed the following 
requirements.
 
■Secure: A network eavesdropper should not be able to obtain the necessary 
information to impersonate a user. More generally, Kerberos should be strong 
enough that a potential opponent does not find it to be the weak link.
 
■Reliable: For all services that rely on Kerberos for access control, lack of 
 availability of the Kerberos service means lack of availability of the supported 
services. Hence, Kerberos should be highly reliable and should employ a 
 distributed server architecture with one system able to back up another.
 
■Transparent: Ideally, the user should not be aware that authentication is taking 
place beyond the requirement to enter a password.
 
■Scalable: The system should be capable of supporting large numbers of clients 
and servers. This suggests a modular, distributed architecture.
To support these requirements, the overall scheme of Kerberos is that of a 
trusted third-party authentication service that uses a protocol based on that pro-
posed by Needham and Schroeder [NEED78], which was discussed in Section 15.2. 
It is trusted in the sense that clients and servers trust Kerberos to mediate their 
mutual authentication. Assuming the Kerberos protocol is well designed, then the 
authentication service is secure if the Kerberos server itself is secure.7
Kerberos Version 4
Version 4 of Kerberos makes use of DES, in a rather elaborate protocol, to pro-
vide the authentication service. Viewing the protocol as a whole, it is difficult to see 
the need for the many elements contained therein. Therefore, we adopt a strategy 
used by Bill Bryant of Project Athena [BRYA88] and build up to the full protocol 
by looking first at several hypothetical dialogues. Each successive dialogue adds 
additional complexity to counter security vulnerabilities revealed in the preceding 
dialogue.
After examining the protocol, we look at some other aspects of version 4.
A SIMPLE AUTHENTICATION DIALOGUE In an unprotected network environment, any 
client can apply to any server for service. The obvious security risk is that of im-
personation. An opponent can pretend to be another client and obtain unauthor-
ized privileges on server machines. To counter this threat, servers must be able to 
confirm the identities of clients who request service. Each server can be required to 
undertake this task for each client/server interaction, but in an open environment, 
this places a substantial burden on each server.
7Remember that the security of the Kerberos server should not automatically be assumed but must be 
guarded carefully (e.g., in a locked room). It is well to remember the fate of the Greek Kerberos, whom 
Hercules was ordered by Eurystheus to capture as his Twelfth Labor: “Hercules found the great dog on its 
chain and seized it by the throat. At once the three heads tried to attack, and Kerberos lashed about with 
his powerful tail. Hercules hung on grimly, and Kerberos relaxed into unconsciousness. Eurystheus may 
have been surprised to see Hercules alive—when he saw the three slavering heads and the huge dog they 
belonged to he was frightened out of his wits, and leapt back into the safety of his great bronze jar.” From 
The Hamlyn Concise Dictionary of Greek and Roman Mythology, by Michael Stapleton, Hamlyn, 1982.

15.3 / KERBEROS 485
An alternative is to use an authentication server (AS) that knows the 
 passwords of all users and stores these in a centralized database. In addition, the AS 
shares a unique secret key with each server. These keys have been distributed physi-
cally or in some other secure manner. Consider the following hypothetical dialogue:
(1) C S AS:    IDC }PC }IDV
(2) AS S C:    Ticket
(3) C S V:   IDC }Ticket
Ticket = E(Kv, [IDC }ADC }IDV])
where
 C = client
 AS = authentication server
 V = server
 IDC = identifier of user on C
 IDV = identifier of V
 PC = password of user on C
 ADC = network address of C
 Kv = secret encryption key shared by AS and V
In this scenario, the user logs on to a workstation and requests access to server V. 
The client module C in the user’s workstation requests the user’s password and then 
sends a message to the AS that includes the user’s ID, the server’s ID, and the user’s 
password. The AS checks its database to see if the user has supplied the proper 
password for this user ID and whether this user is permitted access to server V. If 
both tests are passed, the AS accepts the user as authentic and must now convince 
the server that this user is authentic. To do so, the AS creates a ticket that con-
tains the user’s ID and network address and the server’s ID. This ticket is encrypted 
using the secret key shared by the AS and this server. This ticket is then sent back 
to C. Because the ticket is encrypted, it cannot be altered by C or by an opponent.
With this ticket, C can now apply to V for service. C sends a message to V con-
taining C’s ID and the ticket. V decrypts the ticket and verifies that the user ID in 
the ticket is the same as the unencrypted user ID in the message. If these two match, 
the server considers the user authenticated and grants the requested service.
Each of the ingredients of message (3) is significant. The ticket is encrypted to 
prevent alteration or forgery. The server’s ID (IDV) is included in the ticket so that 
the server can verify that it has decrypted the ticket properly. IDC is included in the 
ticket to indicate that this ticket has been issued on behalf of C. Finally, ADC serves 
to counter the following threat. An opponent could capture the ticket transmitted 
in message (2), then use the name IDC and transmit a message of form (3) from 
another workstation. The server would receive a valid ticket that matches the user 
ID and grant access to the user on that other workstation. To prevent this attack, 
the AS includes in the ticket the network address from which the original request 
came. Now the ticket is valid only if it is transmitted from the same workstation that 
initially requested the ticket.

486  CHAPTER 15 / USER AUTHENTICATION
A MORE SECURE AUTHENTICATION DIALOGUE Although the foregoing scenario solves 
some of the problems of authentication in an open network environment, problems 
remain. Two in particular stand out. First, we would like to minimize the number 
of times that a user has to enter a password. Suppose each ticket can be used only 
once. If user C logs on to a workstation in the morning and wishes to check his or her 
mail at a mail server, C must supply a password to get a ticket for the mail server. If 
C wishes to check the mail several times during the day, each attempt requires re-
entering the password. We can improve matters by saying that tickets are reusable. 
For a single logon session, the workstation can store the mail server ticket after it is 
received and use it on behalf of the user for multiple accesses to the mail server.
However, under this scheme, it remains the case that a user would need a new 
ticket for every different service. If a user wished to access a print server, a mail 
server, a file server, and so on, the first instance of each access would require a new 
ticket and hence require the user to enter the password.
The second problem is that the earlier scenario involved a plaintext transmis-
sion of the password [message (1)]. An eavesdropper could capture the password 
and use any service accessible to the victim.
To solve these additional problems, we introduce a scheme for avoiding plain-
text passwords and a new server, known as the ticket-granting server (TGS). The 
new (but still hypothetical) scenario is as follows.
Once per user logon session:
(1) C S AS:    IDC }IDtgs
(2) AS S C:    E(Kc, Tickettgs)
Once per type of service:
(3) C S TGS: IDC }IDV }Tickettgs
(4) TGS S C: Ticketv
Once per service session:
(5) C S V:   IDC }Ticketv
Tickettgs = E(Ktgs, [IDC }ADC }IDtgs }TS1 }Lifetime1])
Ticketv = E(Kv, [IDC }ADC }IDv }TS2 }Lifetime2])
The new service, TGS, issues tickets to users who have been authenticated to 
AS. Thus, the user first requests a ticket-granting ticket (Tickettgs) from the AS. The 
client module in the user workstation saves this ticket. Each time the user requires 
access to a new service, the client applies to the TGS, using the ticket to authenti-
cate itself. The TGS then grants a ticket for the particular service. The client saves 
each service-granting ticket and uses it to authenticate its user to a server each time 
a particular service is requested. Let us look at the details of this scheme:
1. The client requests a ticket-granting ticket on behalf of the user by sending its 
user’s ID to the AS, together with the TGS ID, indicating a request to use the 
TGS service.

15.3 / KERBEROS 487
2. The AS responds with a ticket that is encrypted with a key that is derived from 
the user’s password (Kc), which is already stored at the AS. When this response 
arrives at the client, the client prompts the user for his or her password, gen-
erates the key, and attempts to decrypt the incoming message. If the correct 
password is supplied, the ticket is successfully recovered.
Because only the correct user should know the password, only the correct user 
can recover the ticket. Thus, we have used the password to obtain credentials from 
Kerberos without having to transmit the password in plaintext. The ticket itself 
consists of the ID and network address of the user, and the ID of the TGS. This 
corresponds to the first scenario. The idea is that the client can use this ticket to 
request multiple service-granting tickets. So the ticket-granting ticket is to be reus-
able. However, we do not wish an opponent to be able to capture the ticket and use 
it. Consider the following scenario: An opponent captures the login ticket and waits 
until the user has logged off his or her workstation. Then the opponent either gains 
access to that workstation or configures his workstation with the same network ad-
dress as that of the victim. The opponent would be able to reuse the ticket to spoof 
the TGS. To counter this, the ticket includes a timestamp, indicating the date and 
time at which the ticket was issued, and a lifetime, indicating the length of time for 
which the ticket is valid (e.g., eight hours). Thus, the client now has a reusable ticket 
and need not bother the user for a password for each new service request. Finally, 
note that the ticket-granting ticket is encrypted with a secret key known only to the 
AS and the TGS. This prevents alteration of the ticket. The ticket is reencrypted 
with a key based on the user’s password. This assures that the ticket can be recov-
ered only by the correct user, providing the authentication.
Now that the client has a ticket-granting ticket, access to any server can be 
obtained with steps 3 and 4.
3. The client requests a service-granting ticket on behalf of the user. For this pur-
pose, the client transmits a message to the TGS containing the user’s ID, the 
ID of the desired service, and the ticket-granting ticket.
4. The TGS decrypts the incoming ticket using a key shared only by the AS and 
the TGS (Ktgs) and verifies the success of the decryption by the presence of its 
ID. It checks to make sure that the lifetime has not expired. Then it compares 
the user ID and network address with the incoming information to authenti-
cate the user. If the user is permitted access to the server V, the TGS issues a 
ticket to grant access to the requested service.
The service-granting ticket has the same structure as the ticket-granting ticket. 
Indeed, because the TGS is a server, we would expect that the same elements are 
needed to authenticate a client to the TGS and to authenticate a client to an appli-
cation server. Again, the ticket contains a timestamp and lifetime. If the user wants 
access to the same service at a later time, the client can simply use the previously 
acquired service-granting ticket and need not bother the user for a password. Note 
that the ticket is encrypted with a secret key (Kv) known only to the TGS and the 
server, preventing alteration.
Finally, with a particular service-granting ticket, the client can gain access to 
the corresponding service with step 5.

488  CHAPTER 15 / USER AUTHENTICATION
5. The client requests access to a service on behalf of the user. For this purpose, the 
client transmits a message to the server containing the user’s ID and the service-
granting ticket. The server authenticates by using the contents of the ticket.
This new scenario satisfies the two requirements of only one password query 
per user session and protection of the user password.
THE VERSION 4 AUTHENTICATION DIALOGUE Although the foregoing scenario en-
hances security compared to the first attempt, two additional problems remain. The 
heart of the first problem is the lifetime associated with the ticket-granting ticket. 
If this lifetime is very short (e.g., minutes), then the user will be repeatedly asked 
for a password. If the lifetime is long (e.g., hours), then an opponent has a greater 
opportunity for replay. An opponent could eavesdrop on the network and capture 
a copy of the ticket-granting ticket and then wait for the legitimate user to log out. 
Then the opponent could forge the legitimate user’s network address and send the 
message of step (3) to the TGS. This would give the opponent unlimited access to 
the resources and files available to the legitimate user.
Similarly, if an opponent captures a service-granting ticket and uses it before it 
expires, the opponent has access to the corresponding service.
Thus, we arrive at an additional requirement. A network service (the TGS or 
an application service) must be able to prove that the person using a ticket is the 
same person to whom that ticket was issued.
The second problem is that there may be a requirement for servers to authen-
ticate themselves to users. Without such authentication, an opponent could sabo-
tage the configuration so that messages to a server were directed to another loca-
tion. The false server would then be in a position to act as a real server and capture 
any information from the user and deny the true service to the user.
We examine these problems in turn and refer to Table 15.1, which shows the 
actual Kerberos protocol. Figure 15.2 provides a simplified overview.
(1)
C S AS IDc }IDtgs}TS1
(2)
AS S C E(Kc, [Kc, tgs }IDtgs}TS2 }Lifetime2 }Tickettgs])
Tickettgs = E(Ktgs, [Kc, tgs }IDC}ADC}IDtgs}TS2 }Lifetime2])
(a) Authentication Service Exchange to obtain ticket-granting ticket
(3)
C S TGS IDv }Tickettgs}Authenticatorc
(4)
TGS S C E(Kc, tgs, [Kc, v }IDv }TS4 }Ticketv])
Tickettgs = E(Ktgs, [Kc, tgs }IDC}ADC}IDtgs}TS2 }Lifetime2])
Ticketv = E(Kv, [Kc, v }IDC}ADC}IDv }TS4 }Lifetime4])
Authenticatorc = E(Kc, tgs, [IDC}ADC}TS3])
(b) Ticket-Granting Service Exchange to obtain service-granting ticket
(5)
C S V Ticketv }Authenticatorc
(6)
V S C E(Kc,v, [TS5 + 1]) (for mutual authentication)
Ticketv = E(Kv, [Kc, v }IDC}ADC}IDv }TS4 }Lifetime4])
Authenticatorc = E(Kc, v, [IDC}ADC}TS5])
(c) Client/Server Authentication Exchange to obtain service
Table 15.1 Summary of Kerberos Version 4 Message Exchanges

15.3 / KERBEROS 489
First, consider the problem of captured ticket-granting tickets and the need 
to determine that the ticket presenter is the same as the client for whom the ticket 
was issued. The threat is that an opponent will steal the ticket and use it before it 
expires. To get around this problem, let us have the AS provide both the client and 
the TGS with a secret piece of information in a secure manner. Then the client can 
prove its identity to the TGS by revealing the secret information—again in a secure 
manner. An efficient way of accomplishing this is to use an encryption key as the 
secure information; this is referred to as a session key in Kerberos.
Table 15.1a shows the technique for distributing the session key. As before, 
the client sends a message to the AS requesting access to the TGS. The AS re-
sponds with a message, encrypted with a key derived from the user’s password 
(Kc), that contains the ticket. The encrypted message also contains a copy of the 
session key, Kc,tgs, where the subscripts indicate that this is a session key for C and 
TGS. Because this session key is inside the message encrypted with Kc, only the 
user’s client can read it. The same session key is included in the ticket, which can 
be read only by the TGS. Thus, the session key has been securely delivered to both 
C and the TGS.
Figure 15.2 Overview of Kerberos
Authentication
server
Ticket-
granting
server (TGS)
Host/
application
server
request ticket-
granting ticket
once per
user logon
session
1. User logs on to
workstation and
requests service on host
3. Workstation prompts
user for password to decrypt
incoming message, and then
send ticket and
authenticator that contains
user’s name, network
address, and time to TGS.
ticket + session key
request service-
granting ticket
ticket + session key
once per
type of service
4. TGS decrypts ticket and
authenticator, verifies request,
and then creates ticket for
requested application server.
Kerberos
5. Workstation sends
ticket and authenticator
to host.
6. Host verifies that
ticket and authenticator
match, and then grants
access to service. If
mutual authentication is
required, server returns
an authenticator.
request service
provide server
authenticator
once per
service session
2. AS verifies user’s access right in
database, and creates ticket-granting ticket
and session key. Results are encrypted
using key derived from user’s password.

490  CHAPTER 15 / USER AUTHENTICATION
Note that several additional pieces of information have been added to this 
first phase of the dialogue. Message (1) includes a timestamp, so that the AS knows 
that the message is timely. Message (2) includes several elements of the ticket in a 
form accessible to C. This enables C to confirm that this ticket is for the TGS and to 
learn its expiration time.
Armed with the ticket and the session key, C is ready to approach the TGS. 
As before, C sends the TGS a message that includes the ticket plus the ID of the 
requested service [message (3) in Table 15.1b]. In addition, C transmits an authentica-
tor, which includes the ID and address of C’s user and a timestamp. Unlike the ticket, 
which is reusable, the authenticator is intended for use only once and has a very short 
lifetime. The TGS can decrypt the ticket with the key that it shares with the AS. This 
ticket indicates that user C has been provided with the session key Kc,tgs. In effect, 
the ticket says, “Anyone who uses Kc,tgs must be C.” The TGS uses the session key to 
decrypt the authenticator. The TGS can then check the name and address from the 
authenticator with that of the ticket and with the network address of the incoming 
message. If all match, then the TGS is assured that the sender of the ticket is indeed 
the ticket’s real owner. In effect, the authenticator says, “At time TS3, I hereby use 
Kc,tgs.” Note that the ticket does not prove anyone’s identity but is a way to distribute 
keys securely. It is the authenticator that proves the client’s identity. Because the au-
thenticator can be used only once and has a short lifetime, the threat of an opponent 
stealing both the ticket and the authenticator for presentation later is countered.
The reply from the TGS in message (4) follows the form of message (2). The 
message is encrypted with the session key shared by the TGS and C and includes 
a session key to be shared between C and the server V, the ID of V, and the time-
stamp of the ticket. The ticket itself includes the same session key.
C now has a reusable service-granting ticket for V. When C presents this ticket, 
as shown in message (5), it also sends an authenticator. The server can decrypt the 
ticket, recover the session key, and decrypt the authenticator.
If mutual authentication is required, the server can reply as shown in message 
(6) of Table 15.1. The server returns the value of the timestamp from the authenti-
cator, incremented by 1, and encrypted in the session key. C can decrypt this mes-
sage to recover the incremented timestamp. Because the message was encrypted by 
the session key, C is assured that it could have been created only by V. The contents 
of the message assure C that this is not a replay of an old reply.
Finally, at the conclusion of this process, the client and server share a secret 
key. This key can be used to encrypt future messages between the two or to ex-
change a new random session key for that purpose.
Figure 15.3 illustrates the Kerberos exchanges among the parties. Table 15.2 
summarizes the justification for each of the elements in the Kerberos protocol.
KERBEROS REALMS AND MULTIPLE KERBERI A full-service Kerberos environment 
consisting of a Kerberos server, a number of clients, and a number of application 
servers requires the following:
1. The Kerberos server must have the user ID and hashed passwords of all partic-
ipating users in its database. All users are registered with the Kerberos server.
2. The Kerberos server must share a secret key with each server. All servers are 
registered with the Kerberos server.

15.3 / KERBEROS 491
Message (1)
Client requests ticket-granting ticket.
IDC
Tells AS identity of user from this client.
IDtgs
Tells AS that user requests access to TGS.
TS1
Allows AS to verify that client’s clock is synchronized with that of AS.
Message (2)
AS returns ticket-granting ticket.
Kc
Encryption is based on user’s password, enabling AS and client to verify password, and 
protecting contents of message (2).
Kc, tgs
Copy of session key accessible to client created by AS to permit secure exchange between 
client and TGS without requiring them to share a permanent key.
IDtgs
Confirms that this ticket is for the TGS.
TS2
Informs client of time this ticket was issued.
Lifetime2
Informs client of the lifetime of this ticket.
Tickettgs
Ticket to be used by client to access TGS.
(a) Authentication Service Exchange
Message (3)
Client requests service-granting ticket.
IDV
Tells TGS that user requests access to server V.
Tickettgs
Assures TGS that this user has been authenticated by AS.
Authenticatorc
Generated by client to validate ticket.
Table 15.2 Rationale for the Elements of the Kerberos Version 4 Protocol
Figure 15.3 Kerberos Exchanges
Client
Client authentication
IDc || IDtgs || TS1
Tickettgs, server ID, and client authentication
IDv || Tickettgs || Authenticatorc
Shared key and ticket
E(Kc,tgs, [Kc,v || IDv || TS4 || Ticketv])
Ticketv and client authentication
Ticketv || Authenticatorc
Service granted
E(Kc,v, [TS5 + 1])
Shared key and ticket
E(Kc, [Kc,tgs || IDtgs || TS2 ||
Lifetime2 || Tickettgs])
Authentication
server (AS)
Ticket-granting
server (TGS)
Service
provider
(Continued)

492  CHAPTER 15 / USER AUTHENTICATION
Message (4)
TGS returns service-granting ticket.
Kc, tgs
Key shared only by C and TGS protects contents of message (4).
Kc, v
Copy of session key accessible to client created by TGS to permit secure exchange between 
client and server without requiring them to share a permanent key.
IDV
Confirms that this ticket is for server V.
TS4
Informs client of time this ticket was issued.
TicketV
Ticket to be used by client to access server V.
Tickettgs
Reusable so that user does not have to reenter password.
Ktgs
Ticket is encrypted with key known only to AS and TGS, to prevent tampering.
Kc, tgs
Copy of session key accessible to TGS used to decrypt authenticator, thereby  authenticating 
ticket.
IDC
Indicates the rightful owner of this ticket.
ADC
Prevents use of ticket from workstation other than one that initially requested the ticket.
IDtgs
Assures server that it has decrypted ticket properly.
TS2
Informs TGS of time this ticket was issued.
Lifetime2
Prevents replay after ticket has expired.
Authenticatorc
Assures TGS that the ticket presenter is the same as the client for whom the ticket was 
issued has very short lifetime to prevent replay.
Kc, tgs
Authenticator is encrypted with key known only to client and TGS, to prevent tampering.
IDC
Must match ID in ticket to authenticate ticket.
ADC
Must match address in ticket to authenticate ticket.
TS3
Informs TGS of time this authenticator was generated.
(b) Ticket-Granting Service Exchange
Message (5)
Client requests service.
TicketV
Assures server that this user has been authenticated by AS.
Authenticatorc
Generated by client to validate ticket.
Message (6)
Optional authentication of server to client.
Kc, v
Assures C that this message is from V.
TS5 + 1
Assures C that this is not a replay of an old reply.
Ticketv
Reusable so that client does not need to request a new ticket from TGS for each access to 
the same server.
Kv
Ticket is encrypted with key known only to TGS and server, to prevent tampering.
Kc, v
Copy of session key accessible to client; used to decrypt authenticator, thereby  authenticating 
ticket.
IDC
Indicates the rightful owner of this ticket.
ADC
Prevents use of ticket from workstation other than one that initially requested the ticket.
IDV
Assures server that it has decrypted ticket properly.
TS4
Informs server of time this ticket was issued.
Lifetime4
Prevents replay after ticket has expired.
Authenticatorc
Assures server that the ticket presenter is the same as the client for whom the ticket was 
issued; has very short lifetime to prevent replay.
Kc, v
Authenticator is encrypted with key known only to client and server, to prevent tampering.
IDC
Must match ID in ticket to authenticate ticket.
ADC
Must match address in ticket to authenticate ticket.
TS5
Informs server of time this authenticator was generated.
(c) Client/Server Authentication Exchange
Table 15.2 Continued

15.3 / KERBEROS 493
Such an environment is referred to as a Kerberos realm. The concept of 
realm can be explained as follows. A Kerberos realm is a set of managed nodes 
that share the same Kerberos database. The Kerberos database resides on the 
Kerberos master computer system, which should be kept in a physically secure 
room. A read-only copy of the Kerberos database might also reside on other 
Kerberos computer systems. However, all changes to the database must be 
made on the master computer system. Changing or accessing the contents of a 
Kerberos database requires the Kerberos master password. A related concept 
is that of a Kerberos principal, which is a service or user that is known to the 
Kerberos system. Each Kerberos principal is identified by its principal name. 
Principal names consist of three parts: a service or user name, an instance name, 
and a realm name.
Networks of clients and servers under different administrative organizations 
typically constitute different realms. That is, it generally is not practical or does 
not conform to administrative policy to have users and servers in one administra-
tive domain registered with a Kerberos server elsewhere. However, users in one 
realm may need access to servers in other realms, and some servers may be will-
ing to provide service to users from other realms, provided that those users are 
authenticated.
Kerberos provides a mechanism for supporting such interrealm  authentication. 
For two realms to support interrealm authentication, a third requirement is added:
3. The Kerberos server in each interoperating realm shares a secret key with the 
server in the other realm. The two Kerberos servers are registered with each 
other.
The scheme requires that the Kerberos server in one realm trust the Kerberos 
server in the other realm to authenticate its users. Furthermore, the participating 
servers in the second realm must also be willing to trust the Kerberos server in the 
first realm.
With these ground rules in place, we can describe the mechanism as follows 
(Figure 15.4): A user wishing service on a server in another realm needs a ticket for 
that server. The user’s client follows the usual procedures to gain access to the local 
TGS and then requests a ticket-granting ticket for a remote TGS (TGS in another 
realm). The client can then apply to the remote TGS for a service-granting ticket for 
the desired server in the realm of the remote TGS.
The details of the exchanges illustrated in Figure 15.4 are as follows (compare 
Table 15.1).
(1) C S AS:    IDc }IDtgs }TS1
(2) AS S C:      E(Kc, [Kc, tgs }IDtgs }TS2 }Lifetime2 }Tickettgs])
(3) C S TGS:   IDtgsrem}Tickettgs }Authenticatorc
(4) TGS S C:    E(Kc,tgs, [Kc, tgsrem}IDtgsrem}TS4 }Tickettgsrem])
(5) C S TGSrem: IDvrem}Tickettgsrem}Authenticatorc
(6) TGSrem S C: E(Kc,tgsrem, [Kc, vrem}IDvrem}TS6 }Ticketvrem])
(7) C S Vrem:     Ticketvrem}Authenticatorc

494  CHAPTER 15 / USER AUTHENTICATION
The ticket presented to the remote server (Vrem) indicates the realm in which 
the user was originally authenticated. The server chooses whether to honor the re-
mote request.
One problem presented by the foregoing approach is that it does not scale well 
to many realms. If there are N realms, then there must be N(N - 1)/2 secure key 
exchanges so that each Kerberos realm can interoperate with all other Kerberos 
realms.
Kerberos Version 5
Kerberos version 5 is specified in RFC 4120 and provides a number of improve-
ments over version 4 [KOHL94]. To begin, we provide an overview of the changes 
from version 4 to version 5 and then look at the version 5 protocol.
Figure 15.4 Request for Service in Another Realm
Authentication
server (AS)
Ticket-
granting
server (TGS)
Kerberos
Authentication
server (AS)
Ticket-
granting
server (TGS)
Kerberos
Client
Realm A
Host/
application
server
Realm B
1. Request ticket for local TGS
2. Ticket for local TGS
3. Request ticket for remote
TGS
4. Ticket for remote TGS
5. Request ticket
for remote server
6. Ticket for remote server
7. Request remote service

15.3 / KERBEROS 495
DIFFERENCES BETWEEN VERSIONS 4 AND 5 Version 5 is intended to address the limita-
tions of version 4 in two areas: environmental shortcomings and technical deficien-
cies. Let us briefly summarize the improvements in each area.8
Kerberos version 4 was developed for use within the Project Athena environ-
ment and, accordingly, did not fully address the need to be of general purpose. This 
led to the following environmental shortcomings.
1. Encryption system dependence: Version 4 requires the use of DES. Export 
restriction on DES as well as doubts about the strength of DES were thus of 
concern. In version 5, ciphertext is tagged with an encryption-type identifier 
so that any encryption technique may be used. Encryption keys are tagged 
with a type and a length, allowing the same key to be used in different al-
gorithms and allowing the specification of different variations on a given 
algorithm.
2. Internet protocol dependence: Version 4 requires the use of Internet Protocol 
(IP) addresses. Other address types, such as the ISO network address, are not 
accommodated. Version 5 network addresses are tagged with type and length, 
allowing any network address type to be used.
3. Message byte ordering: In version 4, the sender of a message employs a byte 
ordering of its own choosing and tags the message to indicate least signifi-
cant byte in lowest address or most significant byte in lowest address. This 
techniques works but does not follow established conventions. In version 
5, all message structures are defined using Abstract Syntax Notation One 
(ASN.1) and Basic Encoding Rules (BER), which provide an unambiguous 
byte ordering.
4. Ticket lifetime: Lifetime values in version 4 are encoded in an 8-bit quantity 
in units of five minutes. Thus, the maximum lifetime that can be expressed is 
28 * 5 = 1280 minutes (a little over 21 hours). This may be inadequate for 
some applications (e.g., a long-running simulation that requires valid Kerberos 
credentials throughout execution). In version 5, tickets include an explicit start 
time and end time, allowing tickets with arbitrary lifetimes.
5. Authentication forwarding: Version 4 does not allow credentials issued to one 
client to be forwarded to some other host and used by some other client. This 
capability would enable a client to access a server and have that server access 
another server on behalf of the client. For example, a client issues a request to 
a print server that then accesses the client’s file from a file server, using the cli-
ent’s credentials for access. Version 5 provides this capability.
6. Interrealm authentication: In version 4, interoperability among N realms 
 requires on the order of N2 Kerberos-to-Kerberos relationships, as described 
earlier. Version 5 supports a method that requires fewer relationships, as de-
scribed shortly.
8The following discussion follows the presentation in [KOHL94].

496  CHAPTER 15 / USER AUTHENTICATION
Apart from these environmental limitations, there are technical  deficiencies 
in the version 4 protocol itself. Most of these deficiencies were documented in 
[BELL90], and version 5 attempts to address these. The deficiencies are the 
following.
1. Double encryption: Note in Table 15.1 [messages (2) and (4)] that tickets pro-
vided to clients are encrypted twice—once with the secret key of the target 
server and then again with a secret key known to the client. The second en-
cryption is not necessary and is computationally wasteful.
2. PCBC encryption: Encryption in version 4 makes use of a nonstandard mode 
of DES known as propagating cipher block chaining (PCBC).9 It has been 
demonstrated that this mode is vulnerable to an attack involving the inter-
change of ciphertext blocks [KOHL89]. PCBC was intended to provide an in-
tegrity check as part of the encryption operation. Version 5 provides explicit 
integrity mechanisms, allowing the standard CBC mode to be used for encryp-
tion. In particular, a checksum or hash code is attached to the message prior to 
encryption using CBC.
3. Session keys: Each ticket includes a session key that is used by the client 
to encrypt the authenticator sent to the service associated with that ticket. 
In addition, the session key may subsequently be used by the client and the 
server to protect messages passed during that session. However, because 
the same ticket may be used repeatedly to gain service from a particular 
server, there is the risk that an opponent will replay messages from an old 
session to the client or the server. In version 5, it is possible for a client 
and server to negotiate a subsession key, which is to be used only for that 
one connection. A new access by the client would result in the use of a new 
subsession key.
4. Password attacks: Both versions are vulnerable to a password attack. The mes-
sage from the AS to the client includes material encrypted with a key based 
on the client’s password.10 An opponent can capture this message and attempt 
to decrypt it by trying various passwords. If the result of a test decryption is of 
the proper form, then the opponent has discovered the client’s password and 
may subsequently use it to gain authentication credentials from Kerberos. This 
is the same type of password attack described in Chapter 21, with the same 
kinds of countermeasures being applicable. Version 5 does provide a mecha-
nism known as preauthentication, which should make password attacks more 
difficult, but it does not prevent them.
THE VERSION 5 AUTHENTICATION DIALOGUE Table 15.3 summarizes the basic ver-
sion 5 dialogue. This is best explained by comparison with version 4 (Table 15.1).
First, consider the authentication service exchange. Message (1) is a client re-
quest for a ticket-granting ticket. As before, it includes the ID of the user and the TGS. 
The following new elements are added:
9This is described in Appendix T.
10Appendix T describes the mapping of passwords to encryption keys.

15.3 / KERBEROS 497
(1)
C S AS Options }IDc }Realmc }IDtgs}Times }Nonce1
(2)
AS S C RealmC}IDC}Tickettgs}E(Kc, [Kc,tgs}Times }Nonce1 }Realmtgs}IDtgs])
Tickettgs = E(Ktgs, [Flags }Kc,tgs}Realmc }IDC}ADC}Times])
(a) Authentication Service Exchange to obtain ticket-granting ticket
(3)
C S TGS Options }IDv }Times }Nonce2 }Tickettgs}Authenticatorc
(4)
TGS S C Realmc }IDC}Ticketv }E(Kc,tgs, [Kc,v }Times }Nonce2 }Realmv }IDv])
Tickettgs = E(Ktgs, [Flags }Kc,tgs}Realmc }IDC}ADC}Times])
Ticketv = E(Kv, [Flags }Kc,v }Realmc }IDC}ADC}Times])
Authenticatorc = E(Kc,tgs, [IDC}Realmc }TS1])
(b) Ticket-Granting Service Exchange to obtain service-granting ticket
(5)
C S V Options }Ticketv }Authenticatorc
(6)
V S C EKc,v[TS2 }Subkey }Seq #]
Ticketv = E(Kv, [Flag }Kc,v }Realmc }IDC}ADC}Times])
Authenticatorc = E(Kc,v, [IDC}Relamc }TS2 }Subkey }Seq #])
(c) Client/Server Authentication Exchange to obtain service
Table 15.3 Summary of Kerberos Version 5 Message Exchanges
 
■Realm: Indicates realm of user
 
■Options: Used to request that certain flags be set in the returned ticket
 
■Times: Used by the client to request the following time settings in the ticket:
—from: the desired start time for the requested ticket
—till: the requested expiration time for the requested ticket
—rtime: requested renew-till time
 
■Nonce: A random value to be repeated in message (2) to assure that the re-
sponse is fresh and has not been replayed by an opponent
Message (2) returns a ticket-granting ticket, identifying information for the 
client, and a block encrypted using the encryption key based on the user’s password. 
This block includes the session key to be used between the client and the TGS, 
times specified in message (1), the nonce from message (1), and TGS identifying 
information. The ticket itself includes the session key, identifying information for 
the client, the requested time values, and flags that reflect the status of this ticket 
and the requested options. These flags introduce significant new functionality to 
 version 5. For now, we defer a discussion of these flags and concentrate on the over-
all  structure of the version 5 protocol.
Let us now compare the ticket-granting service exchange for versions 
4 and 5. We see that message (3) for both versions includes an authenticator, a 
ticket, and the name of the requested service. In addition, version 5 includes re-
quested times and options for the ticket and a nonce—all with functions similar 
to those of message (1). The authenticator itself is essentially the same as the one 
used in version 4.

498  CHAPTER 15 / USER AUTHENTICATION
Message (4) has the same structure as message (2). It returns a ticket plus 
information needed by the client, with the information encrypted using the session 
key now shared by the client and the TGS.
Finally, for the client/server authentication exchange, several new features 
 appear in version 5. In message (5), the client may request as an option that mutual 
authentication is required. The authenticator includes several new fields:
 
■Subkey: The client’s choice for an encryption key to be used to protect this 
specific application session. If this field is omitted, the session key from the 
ticket (Kc,v) is used.
 
■Sequence number: An optional field that specifies the starting sequence num-
ber to be used by the server for messages sent to the client during this session. 
Messages may be sequence numbered to detect replays.
If mutual authentication is required, the server responds with message (6). 
This message includes the timestamp from the authenticator. Note that in version 4, 
the timestamp was incremented by one. This is not necessary in version 5, because 
the nature of the format of messages is such that it is not possible for an oppo-
nent to create message (6) without knowledge of the appropriate encryption keys. 
The subkey field, if present, overrides the subkey field, if present, in message (5).  
The optional sequence number field specifies the starting sequence number to be 
used by the client.
TICKET FLAGS The flags field included in tickets in version 5 supports expanded 
functionality compared to that available in version 4. Table 15.4 summarizes the 
flags that may be included in a ticket.
INITIAL
This ticket was issued using the AS protocol and not issued based on a 
ticket-granting ticket.
PRE-AUTHENT
During initial authentication, the client was authenticated by the KDC 
before a ticket was issued.
HW-AUTHENT
The protocol employed for initial authentication required the use of hard-
ware expected to be possessed solely by the named client.
RENEWABLE
Tells TGS that this ticket can be used to obtain a replacement ticket that 
expires at a later date.
MAY-POSTDATE
Tells TGS that a postdated ticket may be issued based on this ticket-
granting ticket.
POSTDATED
Indicates that this ticket has been postdated; the end server can check the 
authtime field to see when the original authentication occurred.
INVALID
This ticket is invalid and must be validated by the KDC before use.
PROXIABLE
Tells TGS that a new service-granting ticket with a different network 
address may be issued based on the presented ticket.
PROXY
Indicates that this ticket is a proxy.
FORWARDABLE
Tells TGS that a new ticket-granting ticket with a different network 
address may be issued based on this ticket-granting ticket.
FORWARDED
Indicates that this ticket has either been forwarded or was issued based on 
authentication involving a forwarded ticket-granting ticket.
Table 15.4 Kerberos Version 5 Flags

15.3 / KERBEROS 499
The INITIAL flag indicates that this ticket was issued by the AS, not by the 
TGS. When a client requests a service-granting ticket from the TGS, it presents a 
ticket-granting ticket obtained from the AS. In version 4, this was the only way to 
obtain a service-granting ticket. Version 5 provides the additional capability that 
the client can get a service-granting ticket directly from the AS. The utility of this is 
as follows: A server, such as a password-changing server, may wish to know that the 
client’s password was recently tested.
The PRE-AUTHENT flag, if set, indicates that when the AS received the ini-
tial request [message (1)], it authenticated the client before issuing a ticket. The 
exact form of this preauthentication is left unspecified. As an example, the MIT 
implementation of version 5 has encrypted timestamp preauthentication, enabled 
by default. When a user wants to get a ticket, it has to send to the AS a preauthen-
tication block containing a random confounder, a version number, and a timestamp 
all encrypted in the client’s password-based key. The AS decrypts the block and will 
not send a ticket-granting ticket back unless the timestamp in the preauthentica-
tion block is within the allowable time skew (time interval to account for clock drift 
and network delays). Another possibility is the use of a smart card that generates 
continually changing passwords that are included in the preauthenticated messages. 
The passwords generated by the card can be based on a user’s password but be 
transformed by the card so that, in effect, arbitrary passwords are used. This pre-
vents an attack based on easily guessed passwords. If a smart card or similar device 
was used, this is indicated by the HW-AUTHENT flag.
When a ticket has a long lifetime, there is the potential for it to be stolen and 
used by an opponent for a considerable period. If a short lifetime is used to lessen 
the threat, then overhead is involved in acquiring new tickets. In the case of a ticket-
granting ticket, the client would either have to store the user’s secret key, which is 
clearly risky, or repeatedly ask the user for a password. A compromise scheme is 
the use of renewable tickets. A ticket with the RENEWABLE flag set includes two 
expiration times: One for this specific ticket and one that is the latest permissible 
value for an expiration time. A client can have the ticket renewed by presenting it 
to the TGS with a requested new expiration time. If the new time is within the limit 
of the latest permissible value, the TGS can issue a new ticket with a new session 
time and a later specific expiration time. The advantage of this mechanism is that 
the TGS may refuse to renew a ticket reported as stolen.
A client may request that the AS provide a ticket-granting ticket with the 
MAY-POSTDATE flag set. The client can then use this ticket to request a ticket 
that is flagged as POSTDATED and INVALID from the TGS. Subsequently, the 
client may submit the postdated ticket for validation. This scheme can be useful 
for running a long batch job on a server that requires a ticket periodically. The 
client can obtain a number of tickets for this session at once, with spread out time 
values. All but the first ticket are initially invalid. When the execution reaches a 
point in time when a new ticket is required, the client can get the appropriate ticket 
validated. With this approach, the client does not have to repeatedly use its ticket-
granting ticket to obtain a service-granting ticket.
In version 5, it is possible for a server to act as a proxy on behalf of a client, in 
effect adopting the credentials and privileges of the client to request a service from 
another server. If a client wishes to use this mechanism, it requests a ticket-granting 

500  CHAPTER 15 / USER AUTHENTICATION
ticket with the PROXIABLE flag set. When this ticket is presented to the TGS, the 
TGS is permitted to issue a service-granting ticket with a different network address; 
this latter ticket will have its PROXY flag set. An application receiving such a ticket 
may accept it or require additional authentication to provide an audit trail.11
The proxy concept is a limited case of the more powerful forwarding procedure. 
If a ticket is set with the FORWARDABLE flag, a TGS can issue to the requestor a 
ticket-granting ticket with a different network address and the FORWARDED flag 
set. This ticket then can be presented to a remote TGS. This capability allows a cli-
ent to gain access to a server on another realm without requiring that each Kerberos 
maintain a secret key with Kerberos servers in every other realm. For example, 
realms could be structured hierarchically. Then a client could walk up the tree to a 
common node and then back down to reach a target realm. Each step of the walk 
would involve forwarding a ticket-granting ticket to the next TGS in the path.
 15.4 REMOTE USER-AUTHENTICATION USING 
ASYMMETRIC ENCRYPTION
Mutual Authentication
In Chapter 14, we presented one approach to the use of public-key encryption for 
the purpose of session-key distribution (Figure 14.9). This protocol assumes that 
each of the two parties is in possession of the current public key of the other. It may 
not be practical to require this assumption.
A protocol using timestamps is provided in [DENN81]:
1. A S AS: IDA}IDB
2. AS S A: E(PRas, [IDA}PUa }T]) }E(PRas, [IDB }PUb }T])
3. A S B:    E(PRas, [IDA}PUa }T]) }E(PRas, [IDB }PUb }T]) } 
 
E(PUb, E(PRa, [Ks }T]))
In this case, the central system is referred to as an authentication server (AS), 
because it is not actually responsible for secret-key distribution. Rather, the AS pro-
vides public-key certificates. The session key is chosen and encrypted by A; hence, 
there is no risk of exposure by the AS. The timestamps protect against replays of 
compromised keys.
This protocol is compact but, as before, requires the synchronization of clocks. 
Another approach, proposed by Woo and Lam [WOO92a], makes use of nonces. 
The protocol consists of the following steps.
1. A S KDC: IDA}IDB
2. KDC S A: E(PRauth, [IDB }PUb])
3. A S B:    E(PUb, [Na }IDA])
4. B S KDC: IDA}IDB }E(PUauth, Na)
5. KDC S B: E(PRauth, [IDA}PUa]) }E(PUb, E(PRauth, [Na }Ks }IDB]))
11For a discussion of some of the possible uses of the proxy capability, see [NEUM93b].

15.4 / REMOTE USER-AUTHENTICATION USING ASYMMETRIC ENCRYPTION 501
6. B S A:    E(PUa, [E(PRauth, [(Na }Ks }IDB)]) }Nb])
7. A S B:    E(Ks, Nb)
In step 1, A informs the KDC of its intention to establish a secure connection 
with B. The KDC returns to A a copy of B’s public-key certificate (step 2). Using B’s 
public key, A informs B of its desire to communicate and sends a nonce Na (step 3). 
In step 4, B asks the KDC for A’s public-key certificate and requests a session key; 
B includes A’s nonce so that the KDC can stamp the session key with that nonce. 
The nonce is protected using the KDC’s public key. In step 5, the KDC returns to 
B a copy of A’s public-key certificate, plus the information {Na, Ks, IDB}. This infor-
mation basically says that Ks is a secret key generated by the KDC on behalf of B 
and tied to Na; the binding of Ks and Na will assure A that Ks is fresh. This triple is 
encrypted using the KDC’s private key to allow B to verify that the triple is in fact 
from the KDC. It is also encrypted using B’s public key so that no other entity may 
use the triple in an attempt to establish a fraudulent connection with A. In step 6, 
the triple {Na, Ks, IDB}, still encrypted with the KDC’s private key, is relayed to A, 
together with a nonce Nb generated by B. All the foregoing are encrypted using A’s 
public key. A retrieves the session key Ks, uses it to encrypt Nb, and returns it to B. 
This last message assures B of A’s knowledge of the session key.
This seems to be a secure protocol that takes into account the various attacks. 
However, the authors themselves spotted a flaw and submitted a revised version of 
the algorithm in [WOO92b]:
1. A S KDC: IDA}IDB
2. KDC S A:     E(PRauth, [IDB }PUb])
3. A S B:     E(PUb, [Na }IDA])
4. B S KDC: IDA}IDB }E(PUauth, Na)
5. KDC S B: E(PRauth, [IDA}PUa]) }E(PUb, E(PRauth, [Na }Ks }IDA}IDB]))
6. B S A:    E(PUa, [Nb }E(PRauth, [Na }Ks }IDA}IDB])])
7. A S B:    E(Ks, Nb)
The identifier of A, IDA, is added to the set of items encrypted with the KDC’s 
private key in steps 5 and 6. This binds the session key Ks to the identities of the two 
parties that will be engaged in the session. This inclusion of IDA accounts for the 
fact that the nonce value Na is considered unique only among all nonces generated 
by A, not among all nonces generated by all parties. Thus, it is the pair {IDA, Na} 
that uniquely identifies the connection request of A.
In both this example and the protocols described earlier, protocols that ap-
peared secure were revised after additional analysis. These examples highlight the 
difficulty of getting things right in the area of authentication.
One-Way Authentication
We have already presented public-key encryption approaches that are suited to 
electronic mail, including the straightforward encryption of the entire message for 
confidentiality (Figure 12.1b), authentication (Figure 12.1c), or both (Figure 12.1d). 
These approaches require that either the sender know the recipient’s public key 

502  CHAPTER 15 / USER AUTHENTICATION
(confidentiality), the recipient know the sender’s public key (authentication), or 
both (confidentiality plus authentication). In addition, the public-key algorithm 
must be applied once or twice to what may be a long message.
If confidentiality is the primary concern, then the following may be more efficient:
A S B: E(PUb, Ks) }E(Ks, M)
In this case, the message is encrypted with a one-time secret key. A also encrypts this 
one-time key with B’s public key. Only B will be able to use the corresponding private 
key to recover the one-time key and then use that key to decrypt the message. This 
scheme is more efficient than simply encrypting the entire message with B’s public key.
If authentication is the primary concern, then a digital signature may suffice, 
as was illustrated in Figure 13.2:
A S B: M }E(PRa, H(M))
This method guarantees that A cannot later deny having sent the message. 
However, this technique is open to another kind of fraud. Bob composes a mes-
sage to his boss Alice that contains an idea that will save the company money. He 
 appends his digital signature and sends it into the email system. Eventually, the 
message will get delivered to Alice’s mailbox. But suppose that Max has heard of 
Bob’s idea and gains access to the mail queue before delivery. He finds Bob’s mes-
sage, strips off his signature, appends his, and requeues the message to be delivered 
to Alice. Max gets credit for Bob’s idea.
To counter such a scheme, both the message and signature can be encrypted 
with the recipient’s public key:
A S B: E(PUb, [M }E(PRa, H(M))])
The latter two schemes require that B know A’s public key and be convinced 
that it is timely. An effective way to provide this assurance is the digital certificate, 
described in Chapter 14. Now we have
A S B: M }E(PRa, H(M)) }E(PRas, [T}IDA}PUa])
In addition to the message, A sends B the signature encrypted with A’s private 
key and A’s certificate encrypted with the private key of the authentication server. 
The recipient of the message first uses the certificate to obtain the sender’s public 
key and verify that it is authentic and then uses the public key to verify the message 
itself. If confidentiality is required, then the entire message can be encrypted with 
B’s public key. Alternatively, the entire message can be encrypted with a one-time 
secret key; the secret key is also transmitted, encrypted with B’s public key. This ap-
proach is explored in Chapter 19.
 15.5 FEDERATED IDENTITY MANAGEMENT
Federated identity management is a relatively new concept dealing with the use of 
a common identity management scheme across multiple enterprises and numerous 
applications and supporting many thousands, even millions, of users. We begin our 
overview with a discussion of the concept of identity management and then examine 
federated identity management.

17.1 / WEB SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS 547
Virtually all businesses, most government agencies, and many individuals now have 
Web sites. The number of individuals and companies with Internet access is expanding 
rapidly and all of these have graphical Web browsers. As a result, businesses are enthu-
siastic about setting up facilities on the Web for electronic commerce. But the reality 
is that the Internet and the Web are extremely vulnerable to compromises of various 
sorts. As businesses wake up to this reality, the demand for secure Web services grows.
The topic of Web security is a broad one and can easily fill a book. In this chap-
ter, we begin with a discussion of the general requirements for Web security and then 
focus on three standardized schemes that are becoming increasingly important as part 
of Web commerce and that focus on security at the transport layer: SSL/TLS, HTTPS, 
and SSH.
 17.1 WEB SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS
The World Wide Web is fundamentally a client/server application running over the 
Internet and TCP/IP intranets. As such, the security tools and approaches discussed 
so far in this book are relevant to the issue of Web security. However, the following 
characteristics of Web usage suggest the need for tailored security tools:
 
■Although Web browsers are very easy to use, Web servers are relatively easy 
to configure and manage, and Web content is increasingly easy to develop, the 
underlying software is extraordinarily complex. This complex software may 
hide many potential security flaws. The short history of the Web is filled with 
examples of new and upgraded systems, properly installed, that are vulnerable 
to a variety of security attacks.
 
■A Web server can be exploited as a launching pad into the corporation’s or 
agency’s entire computer complex. Once the Web server is subverted, an 
attacker may be able to gain access to data and systems not part of the Web 
itself but connected to the server at the local site.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
 
◆
Summarize Web security threats and Web traffic security approaches.
 
◆
Present an overview of Transport Layer Security (TLS).
 
◆
Understand the differences between Secure Sockets Layer and Transport 
Layer Security.
 
◆
Compare the pseudorandom function used in Transport Layer Security 
with those discussed earlier in the book.
 
◆
Present an overview of HTTPS (HTTP over SSL).
 
◆
Present an overview of Secure Shell (SSH).

548  CHAPTER 17 / TRANSPORT-LEVEL SECURITY
 
■Casual and untrained (in security matters) users are common clients for Web-
based services. Such users are not necessarily aware of the security risks that 
exist and do not have the tools or knowledge to take effective countermeasures.
Web Security Threats
Table 17.1 provides a summary of the types of security threats faced when using the 
Web. One way to group these threats is in terms of passive and active attacks. Passive 
attacks include eavesdropping on network traffic between browser and server and 
gaining access to information on a Web site that is supposed to be restricted. Active 
attacks include impersonating another user, altering messages in transit between 
client and server, and altering information on a Web site.
Another way to classify Web security threats is in terms of the location of the 
threat: Web server, Web browser, and network traffic between browser and server. 
Issues of server and browser security fall into the category of computer system secu-
rity; Part Six of this book addresses the issue of system security in general but is also 
applicable to Web system security. Issues of traffic security fall into the category of 
network security and are addressed in this chapter.
Web Traffic Security Approaches
A number of approaches to providing Web security are possible. The various 
approaches that have been considered are similar in the services they provide and, 
to some extent, in the mechanisms that they use, but they differ with respect to their 
scope of applicability and their relative location within the TCP/IP protocol stack.
Threats
Consequences
Countermeasures
Integrity
r Modification of user data
r Trojan horse browser
r Modification of memory
r Modification of message 
 traffic in transit
r Loss of information
r Compromise of machine
r Vulnerability to all other 
threats
Cryptographic 
checksums
Confidentiality
r Eavesdropping on the net
r Theft of info from server
r Theft of data from client
r Info about network 
configuration
r Info about which client talks 
to server
r Loss of information
r Loss of privacy
Encryption, Web 
proxies
Denial of 
Service
r Killing of user threads
r Flooding machine with bogus 
requests
r Filling up disk or memory
r Isolating machine by DNS 
attacks
r Disruptive
r Annoying
r Prevent user from getting work 
done
Difficult to prevent
Authentication
r Impersonation of legitimate 
users
r Data forgery
r Misrepresentation of user
r Belief that false information 
is valid
Cryptographic 
techniques
Table 17.1 A Comparison of Threats on the Web

17.2 / TRANSPORT LAYER SECURITY 549
Figure 17.1 illustrates this difference. One way to provide Web security is 
to use IP security (IPsec) (Figure 17.1a). The advantage of using IPsec is that it is 
transparent to end users and applications and provides a general-purpose solution. 
Furthermore, IPsec includes a filtering capability so that only selected traffic need 
incur the overhead of IPsec processing.
Another relatively general-purpose solution is to implement security just 
above TCP (Figure 17.1b). The foremost example of this approach is the Secure 
Sockets Layer (SSL) and the follow-on Internet standard known as Transport 
Layer Security (TLS). At this level, there are two implementation choices. For full 
generality, SSL (or TLS) could be provided as part of the underlying protocol suite 
and therefore be transparent to applications. Alternatively, TLS can be embedded 
in specific packages. For example, virtually all browsers come equipped with TLS, 
and most Web servers have implemented the protocol.
Application-specific security services are embedded within the particular 
application. Figure 17.1c shows examples of this architecture. The advantage of this 
approach is that the service can be tailored to the specific needs of a given application.
 17.2 TRANSPORT LAYER SECURITY
One of the most widely used security services is Transport Layer Security (TSL); 
the current version is Version 1.2, defined in RFC 5246. TLS is an Internet stan-
dard that evolved from a commercial protocol known as Secure Sockets Layer 
(SSL). Although SSL implementations are still around, it has been deprecated by 
IETF and is disabled by most corporations offering TLS software. TLS is a general-
purpose service implemented as a set of protocols that rely on TCP. At this level, 
there are two implementation choices. For full generality, TLS could be provided 
as part of the underlying protocol suite and therefore be transparent to applica-
tions. Alternatively, TLS can be embedded in specific packages. For example, most 
browsers come equipped with TLS, and most Web servers have implemented the 
protocol.
TLS Architecture
TLS is designed to make use of TCP to provide a reliable end-to-end secure ser-
vice. TLS is not a single protocol but rather two layers of protocols, as illustrated in 
Figure 17.2.
Figure 17.1 Relative Location of Security Facilities in the TCP/IP Protocol Stack
SMTP
HTTP
TCP
IP/IPSec
(a) Network level
FTP
SMTP
HTTP
TCP
SSL or TLS
IP
(b) Transport level
FTP
IP
S/MIME
HTTP
Kerberos
UDP
SMTP
(c) Application level
TCP

550  CHAPTER 17 / TRANSPORT-LEVEL SECURITY
The TLS Record Protocol provides basic security services to various higher-
layer protocols. In particular, the Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP), which 
provides the transfer service for Web client/server interaction, can operate on top 
of TLS. Three higher-layer protocols are defined as part of TLS: the Handshake 
Protocol; the Change Cipher Spec Protocol; and the Alert Protocol. These TLS-
specific protocols are used in the management of TLS exchanges and are examined 
later in this section. A fourth protocol, the Heartbeat Protocol, is defined in a sepa-
rate RFC and is also discussed subsequently in this section.
Two important TLS concepts are the TLS session and the TLS connection, 
which are defined in the specification as follows:
 
■Connection: A connection is a transport (in the OSI layering model definition) 
that provides a suitable type of service. For TLS, such connections are peer-to-
peer relationships. The connections are transient. Every connection is associ-
ated with one session.
 
■Session: A TLS session is an association between a client and a server. Sessions 
are created by the Handshake Protocol. Sessions define a set of cryptographic 
security parameters, which can be shared among multiple connections. Sessions 
are used to avoid the expensive negotiation of new security parameters for 
each connection.
Between any pair of parties (applications such as HTTP on client and server), 
there may be multiple secure connections. In theory, there may also be multiple 
simultaneous sessions between parties, but this feature is not used in practice.
There are a number of states associated with each session. Once a session is 
 established, there is a current operating state for both read and write (i.e., receive 
and send). In addition, during the Handshake Protocol, pending read and write 
states are created. Upon successful conclusion of the Handshake Protocol, the 
pending states become the current states.
A session state is defined by the following parameters:
 
■Session identifier: An arbitrary byte sequence chosen by the server to identify 
an active or resumable session state.
 
■Peer certificate: An X509.v3 certificate of the peer. This element of the state 
may be null.
Figure 17.2 TLS Protocol Stack
IP
TCP
Record protocol
Handshake
protocol
Change
cipher spec
protocol
Alert
protocol
HTTP
Heartbeat
protocol

17.2 / TRANSPORT LAYER SECURITY 551
 
■Compression method: The algorithm used to compress data prior to encryption.
 
■Cipher spec: Specifies the bulk data encryption algorithm (such as null, AES, 
etc.) and a hash algorithm (such as MD5 or SHA-1) used for MAC calculation. 
It also defines cryptographic attributes such as the hash_size.
 
■Master secret: 48-byte secret shared between the client and server.
 
■Is resumable: A flag indicating whether the session can be used to initiate new 
connections.
A connection state is defined by the following parameters:
 
■Server and client random: Byte sequences that are chosen by the server and 
client for each connection.
 
■Server write MAC secret: The secret key used in MAC operations on data sent 
by the server.
 
■Client write MAC secret: The symmetric key used in MAC operations on data 
sent by the client.
 
■Server write key: The symmetric encryption key for data encrypted by the 
server and decrypted by the client.
 
■Client write key: The symmetric encryption key for data encrypted by the 
 client and decrypted by the server.
 
■Initialization vectors: When a block cipher in CBC mode is used, an initial-
ization vector (IV) is maintained for each key. This field is first initialized by 
the TLS Handshake Protocol. Thereafter, the final ciphertext block from each 
 record is preserved for use as the IV with the following record.
 
■Sequence numbers: Each party maintains separate sequence numbers for 
transmitted and received messages for each connection. When a party sends or 
receives a “change cipher spec message,” the appropriate sequence number is 
set to zero. Sequence numbers may not exceed 264 - 1.
TLS Record Protocol
The TLS Record Protocol provides two services for TLS connections:
 
■Confidentiality: The Handshake Protocol defines a shared secret key that is 
used for conventional encryption of TLS payloads.
 
■Message Integrity: The Handshake Protocol also defines a shared secret key 
that is used to form a message authentication code (MAC).
Figure 17.3 indicates the overall operation of the TLS Record Protocol. The 
Record Protocol takes an application message to be transmitted, fragments the data 
into manageable blocks, optionally compresses the data, applies a MAC, encrypts, 
adds a header, and transmits the resulting unit in a TCP segment. Received data 
are decrypted, verified, decompressed, and reassembled before being delivered to 
higher-level users.
The first step is fragmentation. Each upper-layer message is fragmented into 
blocks of 214 bytes (16,384 bytes) or less. Next, compression is optionally applied. 
Compression must be lossless and may not increase the content length by more than 

552  CHAPTER 17 / TRANSPORT-LEVEL SECURITY
1024 bytes.1 In TLSv2, no compression algorithm is specified, so the default com-
pression algorithm is null.
The next step in processing is to compute a message authentication code over 
the compressed data. TLS makes use of the HMAC algorithm defined in RFC 2104. 
Recall from Chapter 12 that HMAC is defined as
 
HMACK(M) = H[(K+ ⊕opad) ‘ H[(K+ ⊕ipad) ‘ M]] 
where
H     = embedded hash function (for TLS, either MD5 or SHA-1)
M     = message input to HMAC
K+    = secret key padded with zeros on the left so that the result is equal to 
the block length of the hash code (for MD5 and SHA-1, block 
length = 512 bits)
ipad = 00110110 (36 in hexadecimal) repeated 64 times (512 bits)
opad = 01011100 (5C in hexadecimal) repeated 64 times (512 bits)
For TLS, the MAC calculation encompasses the fields indicated in the 
 following expression:
HMAC_hash(MAC_write_secret, seq_num ‘ TLSCompressed.type ‘ 
TLSCompressed.version ‘ TLSCompressed.length ‘ TLSCompressed.fragment)
The MAC calculation covers all of the fields XXX, plus the field 
TLSCompressed.version, which is the version of the protocol being employed.
Next, the compressed message plus the MAC are encrypted using symmetric 
encryption. Encryption may not increase the content length by more than 1024 bytes, 
Figure 17.3 TLS Record Protocol Operation
Application data
Fragment
Compress
Add MAC
Encrypt
Append TLS
record header
1Of course, one hopes that compression shrinks rather than expands the data. However, for very short 
blocks, it is possible, because of formatting conventions, that the compression algorithm will actually pro-
vide output that is longer than the input.

17.2 / TRANSPORT LAYER SECURITY 553
so that the total length may not exceed 214 + 2048. The following encryption algo-
rithms are permitted:
Block Cipher
Stream Cipher
Algorithm
Key Size
Algorithm
Key Size
AES
3DES
128, 256
168
RC4-128
128
For stream encryption, the compressed message plus the MAC are encrypted. 
Note that the MAC is computed before encryption takes place and that the MAC is 
then encrypted along with the plaintext or compressed plaintext.
For block encryption, padding may be added after the MAC prior to encryp-
tion. The padding is in the form of a number of padding bytes followed by a one-
byte indication of the length of the padding. The padding can be any amount that 
results in a total that is a multiple of the cipher’s block length, up to a maximum 
of 255 bytes. For example, if the cipher block length is 16 bytes (e.g., AES) and if 
the plaintext (or compressed text if compression is used) plus MAC plus padding 
length byte is 79 bytes long, then the padding length (in bytes) can be 1, 17, 33, and 
so on, up to 161. At a padding length of 161, the total length is 79 + 161 = 240. A 
variable padding length may be used to frustrate attacks based on an analysis of 
the lengths of exchanged messages.
The final step of TLS Record Protocol processing is to prepend a header con-
sisting of the following fields:
 
■Content Type (8 bits): The higher-layer protocol used to process the enclosed 
fragment.
 
■Major Version (8 bits): Indicates major version of TLS in use. For TLSv2, the 
value is 3.
 
■Minor Version (8 bits): Indicates minor version in use. For TLSv2, the value is 1.
 
■Compressed Length (16 bits): The length in bytes of the plaintext fragment 
(or compressed fragment if compression is used). The maximum value is 
214 + 2048.
The content types that have been defined are change_cipher_spec, 
alert, handshake, and application_data. The first three are the TLS-
specific protocols, discussed next. Note that no distinction is made among the vari-
ous applications (e.g., HTTP) that might use TLS; the content of the data created by 
such applications is opaque to TLS. 
Figure 17.4 illustrates the TLS record format.
Change Cipher Spec Protocol
The Change Cipher Spec Protocol is one of the four TLS-specific protocols that use 
the TLS Record Protocol, and it is the simplest. This protocol consists of a single 
message (Figure 17.5a), which consists of a single byte with the value 1. The sole 
purpose of this message is to cause the pending state to be copied into the current 
state, which updates the cipher suite to be used on this connection.

554  CHAPTER 17 / TRANSPORT-LEVEL SECURITY
Alert Protocol
The Alert Protocol is used to convey TLS-related alerts to the peer entity. As with 
other applications that use TLS, alert messages are compressed and encrypted, as 
specified by the current state.
Each message in this protocol consists of two bytes (Figure 17.5b). The first 
byte takes the value warning (1) or fatal (2) to convey the severity of the message. 
If the level is fatal, TLS immediately terminates the connection. Other connections 
on the same session may continue, but no new connections on this session may 
be established. The second byte contains a code that indicates the specific alert. 
The  following alerts are always fatal:
 
■unexpected_message: An inappropriate message was received.
 
■bad_record_mac: An incorrect MAC was received.
 
■decompression_failure: The decompression function received improper input 
(e.g., unable to decompress or decompress to greater than maximum allowable 
length).
 
■handshake_failure: Sender was unable to negotiate an acceptable set of secu-
rity parameters given the options available.
 
■illegal_parameter: A field in a handshake message was out of range or incon-
sistent with other fields.
Figure 17.5 TLS Record Protocol Payload
1
(a) Change Cipher Spec Protocol
1 byte
Type
(c) Handshake Protocol
1 byte
Length
3 bytes
Content
Ú 0 bytes
(d) Other Upper-Layer Protocol (e.g., HTTP)
Opaque content
Ú 1 byte
Level
(b) Alert Protocol
1 byte 1 byte
Alert
Figure 17.4 TLS Record Format
Content
type
Major
version
Minor
version
Compressed
length
Plaintext
(optionally
compressed)
MAC (0, 16, or 20 bytes)
Encrypted

17.2 / TRANSPORT LAYER SECURITY 555
 
■decryption_failed: A ciphertext decrypted in an invalid way; either it was not 
an even multiple of the block length or its padding values, when checked, were 
incorrect.
 
■record_overflow: A TLS record was received with a payload (ciphertext) 
whose length exceeds 214 + 2048 bytes, or the ciphertext decrypted to a length 
of greater than 214 + 1024 bytes.
 
■unknown_ca: A valid certificate chain or partial chain was received, but the 
certificate was not accepted because the CA certificate could not be located or 
could not be matched with a known, trusted CA.
 
■access_denied: A valid certificate was received, but when access control was 
applied, the sender decided not to proceed with the negotiation.
 
■decode_error: A message could not be decoded, because either a field was out 
of its specified range or the length of the message was incorrect.
 
■export_restriction: A negotiation not in compliance with export restrictions on 
key length was detected.
 
■protocol_version: The protocol version the client attempted to negotiate is 
recognized but not supported.
 
■insufficient_security: Returned instead of handshake_failure when a negotia-
tion has failed specifically because the server requires ciphers more secure 
than those supported by the client.
 
■internal_error: An internal error unrelated to the peer or the correctness of 
the protocol makes it impossible to continue.
The remaining alerts are the following.
 
■close_notify: Notifies the recipient that the sender will not send any more mes-
sages on this connection. Each party is required to send a close_notify alert 
before closing the write side of a connection.
 
■bad_certificate: A received certificate was corrupt (e.g., contained a signature 
that did not verify).
 
■unsupported_certificate: The type of the received certificate is not supported.
 
■certificate_revoked: A certificate has been revoked by its signer.
 
■certificate_expired: A certificate has expired.
 
■certificate_unknown: Some other unspecified issue arose in processing the 
certificate, rendering it unacceptable.
 
■decrypt_error: A handshake cryptographic operation failed, including being 
unable to verify a signature, decrypt a key exchange, or validate a finished 
message.
 
■user_canceled: This handshake is being canceled for some reason unrelated to 
a protocol failure.
 
■no_renegotiation: Sent by a client in response to a hello request or by the 
server in response to a client hello after initial handshaking. Either of these 
messages would normally result in renegotiation, but this alert indicates that 
the sender is not able to renegotiate. This message is always a warning.

556  CHAPTER 17 / TRANSPORT-LEVEL SECURITY
Handshake Protocol
The most complex part of TLS is the Handshake Protocol. This protocol allows 
the server and client to authenticate each other and to negotiate an encryption and 
MAC algorithm and cryptographic keys to be used to protect data sent in a TLS 
record. The Handshake Protocol is used before any application data is transmitted.
The Handshake Protocol consists of a series of messages exchanged by client 
and server. All of these have the format shown in Figure 17.5c . Each message has 
three fields:
 
■Type (1 byte): Indicates one of 10 messages. Table 17.2 lists the defined mes-
sage types.
 
■Length (3 bytes): The length of the message in bytes.
 
■
Content (# 0 bytes): The parameters associated with this message; these are 
listed in Table 17.2.
Figure 17.6 shows the initial exchange needed to establish a logical connection 
between client and server. The exchange can be viewed as having four phases.
PHASE 1. ESTABLISH SECURITY CAPABILITIES Phase 1 initiates a logical connection 
and establishes the security capabilities that will be associated with it. The exchange 
is initiated by the client, which sends a client_hello message with the following 
parameters:
 
■Version: The highest TLS version understood by the client.
 
■Random: A client-generated random structure consisting of a 32-bit time-
stamp and 28 bytes generated by a secure random number generator. These 
values serve as nonces and are used during key exchange to prevent replay 
attacks.
 
■Session ID: A variable-length session identifier. A nonzero value indicates that 
the client wishes to update the parameters of an existing connection or to cre-
ate a new connection on this session. A zero value indicates that the client 
wishes to establish a new connection on a new session.
Message Type
Parameters
hello_request
null
client_hello
version, random, session id, cipher suite, compression method
server_hello
version, random, session id, cipher suite, compression method
certificate
chain of X.509v3 certificates
server_key_exchange
parameters, signature
certificate_request
type, authorities
server_done
null
certificate_verify
signature
client_key_exchange
parameters, signature
finished
hash value
Table 17.2 TLS Handshake Protocol Message Types

17.2 / TRANSPORT LAYER SECURITY 557
 
■CipherSuite: This is a list that contains the combinations of cryptographic 
algorithms supported by the client, in decreasing order of preference. Each 
element of the list (each cipher suite) defines both a key exchange algorithm 
and a CipherSpec; these are discussed subsequently.
 
■Compression Method: This is a list of the compression methods the client 
supports.
After sending the client_hello message, the client waits for the server_
hello message, which contains the same parameters as the client_hello 
Figure 17.6 Handshake Protocol Action
Client
Server
Phase 1
Establish security capabilities, including
protocol version, session ID, cipher suite,
compression method, and initial random
numbers.
Phase 2
Server may send certificate, key exchange,
and request certificate. Server signals end
of hello message phase.
Phase 3
Client sends certificate if requested. Client
sends key exchange. Client may send
certificate verification.
Phase 4
Change cipher suite and finish
handshake protocol.
Note: Shaded transfers are
optional or situation-dependent
messages that are not always sent.
finished
change_cipher_spec
finished
change_cipher_spec
certificate_verify
client_key_exchange
certificate
server_hello_done
certificate_request
server_key_exchange
certificate
server_hello
client_hello
Time

558  CHAPTER 17 / TRANSPORT-LEVEL SECURITY
 message. For the server_hello message, the following conventions apply. The 
Version field contains the lowest of the version suggested by the client and the highest 
supported by the server. The Random field is generated by the server and is indepen-
dent of the client’s Random field. If the SessionID field of the client was nonzero, the 
same value is used by the server; otherwise the server’s SessionID field contains the 
value for a new session. The CipherSuite field contains the single cipher suite selected 
by the server from those proposed by the client. The Compression field contains the 
compression method selected by the server from those proposed by the client.
The first element of the Ciphersuite parameter is the key exchange method 
(i.e., the means by which the cryptographic keys for conventional encryption and 
MAC are exchanged). The following key exchange methods are supported.
 
■RSA: The secret key is encrypted with the receiver’s RSA public key. A public-
key certificate for the receiver’s key must be made available.
 
■Fixed Diffie–Hellman: This is a Diffie–Hellman key exchange in which the 
server’s certificate contains the Diffie–Hellman public parameters signed by 
the certificate authority (CA). That is, the public-key certificate contains the 
Diffie–Hellman public-key parameters. The client provides its Diffie–Hellman 
public-key parameters either in a certificate, if client authentication is re-
quired, or in a key exchange message. This method results in a fixed secret key 
between two peers based on the Diffie–Hellman calculation using the fixed 
public keys.
 
■Ephemeral Diffie-Hellman: This technique is used to create ephemeral (tem-
porary, one-time) secret keys. In this case, the Diffie–Hellman public keys are 
exchanged and signed using the sender’s private RSA or DSS key. The receiver 
can use the corresponding public key to verify the signature. Certificates are used 
to authenticate the public keys. This would appear to be the most secure of the 
three Diffie–Hellman options because it results in a temporary, authenticated key.
 
■Anonymous Diffie–Hellman: The base Diffie–Hellman algorithm is used 
with no authentication. That is, each side sends its public Diffie–Hellman pa-
rameters to the other with no authentication. This approach is vulnerable to 
man-in-the-middle attacks, in which the attacker conducts anonymous Diffie–
Hellman with both parties.
Following the definition of a key exchange method is the CipherSpec, which 
includes the following fields:
 
■CipherAlgorithm: Any of the algorithms mentioned earlier: RC4, RC2, DES, 
3DES, DES40, or IDEA
 
■MACAlgorithm: MD5 or SHA-1
 
■CipherType: Stream or Block
 
■IsExportable: True or False
 
■HashSize: 0, 16 (for MD5), or 20 (for SHA-1) bytes
 
■Key Material: A sequence of bytes that contain data used in generating the 
write keys
 
■IV Size: The size of the Initialization Value for Cipher Block Chaining (CBC) 
encryption

17.2 / TRANSPORT LAYER SECURITY 559
PHASE 2. SERVER AUTHENTICATION AND KEY EXCHANGE The server begins this 
phase by sending its certificate if it needs to be authenticated; the message con-
tains one or a chain of X.509 certificates. The certificate message is required for 
any agreed-on key exchange method except anonymous Diffie–Hellman. Note 
that if fixed Diffie–Hellman is used, this certificate message functions as the serv-
er’s key exchange message because it contains the server’s public Diffie–Hellman 
parameters.
Next, a server_key_exchange message may be sent if it is required. It is not 
required in two instances: (1) The server has sent a certificate with fixed Diffie–
Hellman parameters; or (2) RSA key exchange is to be used. The server_key_ 
exchange message is needed for the following:
 
■Anonymous Diffie–Hellman: The message content consists of the two global 
Diffie–Hellman values (a prime number and a primitive root of that number) 
plus the server’s public Diffie–Hellman key (see Figure 10.1).
 
■Ephemeral Diffie–Hellman: The message content includes the three Diffie–
Hellman parameters provided for anonymous Diffie–Hellman plus a signature 
of those parameters.
 
■RSA key exchange (in which the server is using RSA but has a signature-only 
RSA key): Accordingly, the client cannot simply send a secret key encrypted 
with the server’s public key. Instead, the server must create a temporary RSA 
public/private key pair and use the server_key_exchange message to send the 
public key. The message content includes the two parameters of the temporary 
RSA public key (exponent and modulus; see Figure 9.5) plus a signature of 
those parameters.
Some further details about the signatures are warranted. As usual, a signature 
is created by taking the hash of a message and encrypting it with the sender’s private 
key. In this case, the hash is defined as
 
hash(ClientHello.random ‘ ServerHello.random ‘ ServerParams) 
So the hash covers not only the Diffie–Hellman or RSA parameters but also the 
two nonces from the initial hello messages. This ensures against replay attacks and 
misrepresentation. In the case of a DSS signature, the hash is performed using the 
SHA-1 algorithm. In the case of an RSA signature, both an MD5 and an SHA-1 
hash are calculated, and the concatenation of the two hashes (36 bytes) is encrypted 
with the server’s private key.
Next, a nonanonymous server (server not using anonymous Diffie–Hellman) 
can request a certificate from the client. The certificate_request message includes 
two parameters: certificate_type and certificate_authorities. The certificate type in-
dicates the public-key algorithm and its use:
 
■RSA, signature only
 
■DSS, signature only
 
■RSA for fixed Diffie–Hellman; in this case the signature is used only for 
authentication, by sending a certificate signed with RSA
 
■DSS for fixed Diffie–Hellman; again, used only for authentication

560  CHAPTER 17 / TRANSPORT-LEVEL SECURITY
The second parameter in the certificate_request message is a list of the distin-
guished names of acceptable certificate authorities.
The final message in phase 2, and one that is always required, is the server_
done message, which is sent by the server to indicate the end of the server hello and 
associated messages. After sending this message, the server will wait for a client 
response. This message has no parameters.
PHASE 3. CLIENT AUTHENTICATION AND KEY EXCHANGE Upon receipt of the 
server_done message, the client should verify that the server provided a valid 
certificate (if required) and check that the server_hello parameters are accept-
able. If all is satisfactory, the client sends one or more messages back to the server.
If the server has requested a certificate, the client begins this phase by send-
ing a certificate message. If no suitable certificate is available, the client sends a 
no_certificate alert instead.
Next is the client_key_exchange message, which must be sent in this phase. 
The content of the message depends on the type of key exchange, as follows:
 
■RSA: The client generates a 48-byte pre-master secret and encrypts with the 
public key from the server’s certificate or temporary RSA key from a server_
key_exchange message. Its use to compute a master secret is explained later.
 
■Ephemeral or Anonymous Diffie–Hellman: The client’s public Diffie–Hellman 
parameters are sent.
 
■Fixed Diffie–Hellman: The client’s public Diffie–Hellman parameters were 
sent in a certificate message, so the content of this message is null.
Finally, in this phase, the client may send a certificate_verify message to pro-
vide explicit verification of a client certificate. This message is only sent following 
any client certificate that has signing capability (i.e., all certificates except those 
containing fixed Diffie–Hellman parameters). This message signs a hash code based 
on the preceding messages, defined as
CertificateVerify.signature.md5_hash
 MD5(handshake_messages);
Certificate.signature.sha_hash
 SHA(handshake_messages);
where handshake_messages refers to all Handshake Protocol messages sent or 
received starting at client_hello but not including this message. If the user’s 
private key is DSS, then it is used to encrypt the SHA-1 hash. If the user’s private 
key is RSA, it is used to encrypt the concatenation of the MD5 and SHA-1 hashes. 
In either case, the purpose is to verify the client’s ownership of the private key for 
the client certificate. Even if someone is misusing the client’s certificate, he or she 
would be unable to send this message.
PHASE 4. FINISH Phase 4 completes the setting up of a secure connection. The  client 
sends a change_cipher_spec message and copies the pending CipherSpec into the 
current CipherSpec. Note that this message is not considered part of the Handshake 
Protocol but is sent using the Change Cipher Spec Protocol. The client then imme-
diately sends the finished message under the new algorithms, keys, and secrets. 

17.2 / TRANSPORT LAYER SECURITY 561
The finished message verifies that the key exchange and authentication processes 
were successful. The content of the finished message is:
PRF(master_secret, finished_label, MD5(handshake_messages) ‘ SHA@1
(handshake_messages))
where finished_label is the string “client finished” for the client and “server 
finished” for the server.
In response to these two messages, the server sends its own change_ cipher_
spec message, transfers the pending to the current CipherSpec, and sends its fin-
ished message. At this point, the handshake is complete and the client and server 
may begin to exchange application-layer data.
Cryptographic Computations
Two further items are of interest: (1) the creation of a shared master secret by 
means of the key exchange; and (2) the generation of cryptographic parameters 
from the master secret.
MASTER SECRET CREATION The shared master secret is a one-time 48-byte value 
(384 bits) generated for this session by means of secure key exchange. The creation 
is in two stages. First, a pre_master_secret is exchanged. Second, the  master_
secret is calculated by both parties. For pre_master_secret exchange, there 
are two possibilities.
 
■RSA: A 48-byte pre_master_secret is generated by the client, encrypted with 
the server’s public RSA key, and sent to the server. The server decrypts the 
ciphertext using its private key to recover the pre_master_secret.
 
■Diffie–Hellman: Both client and server generate a Diffie–Hellman public key. 
After these are exchanged, each side performs the Diffie–Hellman calculation 
to create the shared pre_master_secret.
Both sides now compute the master_secret as
master_secret =
 PRF(pre_master_secret, “master secret”, ClientHello.random ‘ ServerHello 
.random)
where ClientHello.random and ServerHello.random are the two nonce 
values exchanged in the initial hello messages.
The algorithm is performed until 48 bytes of pseudorandom output are pro-
duced. The calculation of the key block material (MAC secret keys, session encryp-
tion keys, and IVs) is defined as
key_block =
 PRF(SecurityParameters.master_secret, “key expansion”,
SecurityParameters.server_random ‘ SecurityParameters.client_random)
until enough output has been generated.

562  CHAPTER 17 / TRANSPORT-LEVEL SECURITY
GENERATION OF CRYPTOGRAPHIC PARAMETERS CipherSpecs require a client write 
MAC secret, a server write MAC secret, a client write key, a server write key, a 
client write IV, and a server write IV, which are generated from the master secret 
in that order. These parameters are generated from the master secret by hashing 
the master secret into a sequence of secure bytes of sufficient length for all needed 
parameters.
The generation of the key material from the master secret uses the same for-
mat for generation of the master secret from the pre-master secret as
key_block = MD5(master_secret ‘ SHA(=A> ‘ master_secret ‘
ServerHello.random ‘ ClientHello.random)) ‘ 
MD5(master_secret ‘ SHA(=BB> ‘ master_secret ‘ 
ServerHello.random ‘ ClientHello.random)) ‘ 
MD5(master_secret ‘ SHA(=CCC> ‘ master_secret ‘ 
ServerHello.random ‘ ClientHello.random)) ‘ c
until enough output has been generated. The result of this algorithmic structure is a 
pseudorandom function. We can view the master_secret as the pseudorandom 
seed value to the function. The client and server random numbers can be viewed as 
salt values to complicate cryptanalysis (see Chapter 21 for a discussion of the use of 
salt values).
PSEUDORANDOM FUNCTION TLS makes use of a pseudorandom function referred 
to as PRF to expand secrets into blocks of data for purposes of key generation or 
validation. The objective is to make use of a relatively small, shared secret value but 
to generate longer blocks of data in a way that is secure from the kinds of attacks 
made on hash functions and MACs. The PRF is based on the data expansion func-
tion (Figure 17.7) given as
 
P_hash(secret, seed) = HMAC_hash(secret, A(1) ‘ seed) ‘
                                          HMAC_hash(secret, A(2) ‘ seed) ‘
                                         HMAC_hash(secret, A(3) ‘ seed) ‘
 
where A() is defined as
A(0) = seed
A(i) = HMAC_hash(secret, A(i - 1))
The data expansion function makes use of the HMAC algorithm with either MD5 
or SHA-1 as the underlying hash function. As can be seen, P_hash can be iterated 
as many times as necessary to produce the required quantity of data. For example, if 
P_SHA256 was used to generate 80 bytes of data, it would have to be iterated three 
times (through A(3)), producing 96 bytes of data of which the last 16 would be dis-
carded. In this case, P_MD5 would have to be iterated four times, producing exactly 
64 bytes of data. Note that each iteration involves two executions of HMAC, each 
of which in turn involves two executions of the underlying hash algorithm.

17.2 / TRANSPORT LAYER SECURITY 563
To make PRF as secure as possible, it uses two hash algorithms in a way that 
should guarantee its security if either algorithm remains secure. PRF is defined as
 
PRF(secret, label, seed) = P_6hash7(secret, label ‘ seed) 
PRF takes as input a secret value, an identifying label, and a seed value and 
produces an output of arbitrary length.
Heartbeat Protocol
In the context of computer networks, a heartbeat is a periodic signal generated by 
hardware or software to indicate normal operation or to synchronize other parts of 
a system. A heartbeat protocol is typically used to monitor the availability of a pro-
tocol entity. In the specific case of TLS, a Heartbeat protocol was defined in 2012 in 
RFC 6250 (Transport Layer Security (TLS) and Datagram Transport Layer Security 
(DTLS) Heartbeat Extension).
Figure 17.7 TLS Function P_hash(secret, seed)
Secret
Seed
Seed
A(1)
HMAC
Secret
Secret
Length = hash size
Secret
Seed
A(2)
HMAC
HMAC
Secret
Seed
A(3)
HMAC
HMAC
Secret
HMAC

564  CHAPTER 17 / TRANSPORT-LEVEL SECURITY
The Heartbeat protocol runs on top of the TLS Record Protocol and con-
sists of two message types: heartbeat_request and heartbeat_response. 
The use of the Heartbeat protocol is established during Phase 1 of the Handshake 
protocol (Figure 17.6). Each peer indicates whether it supports heartbeats. If heart-
beats are supported, the peer indicates whether it is willing to receive heartbeat_ 
request messages and respond with heartbeat_response messages or only 
willing to send heartbeat_request messages.
A heartbeat_request message can be sent at any time. Whenever a re-
quest message is received, it should be answered promptly with a corresponding 
heartbeat_response message. The heartbeat_request message includes 
payload length, payload, and padding fields. The payload is a random content 
between 16 bytes and 64 Kbytes in length. The corresponding heartbeat_ 
response message must include an exact copy of the received payload. The pad-
ding is also random content. The padding enables the sender to perform a path 
MTU (maximum transfer unit) discovery operation, by sending requests with in-
creasing padding until there is no answer anymore, because one of the hosts on 
the path cannot handle the message.
The heartbeat serves two purposes. First, it assures the sender that the recipi-
ent is still alive, even though there may not have been any activity over the under-
lying TCP connection for a while. Second, the heartbeat generates activity across 
the connection during idle periods, which avoids closure by a firewall that does not 
tolerate idle connections.
The requirement for the exchange of a payload was designed into the Heartbeat 
protocol to support its use in a connectionless version of TLS known as Datagram 
Transport Layer Security (DTLS). Because a connectionless service is subject 
to packet loss, the payload enables the requestor to match response messages to 
request messages. For simplicity, the same version of the Heartbeat protocol is used 
with both TLS and DTLS. Thus, the payload is required for both TLS and DTLS.
SSL/TLS ATTACKS
Since the first introduction of SSL in 1994, and the subsequent standardization of 
TLS, numerous attacks have been devised against these protocols. The appearance 
of each attack has necessitated changes in the protocol, the encryption tools used, or 
some aspect of the implementation of SSL and TLS to counter these threats.
ATTACK CATEGORIES We can group the attacks into four general categories:
 
■Attacks on the handshake protocol: As early as 1998, an approach to com-
promising the handshake protocol based on exploiting the formatting and 
implementation of the RSA encryption scheme was presented [BLEI98]. As 
 countermeasures were implemented the attack was refined and adjusted to not 
only thwart the countermeasures but also speed up the attack [e.g., BARD12].
 
■Attacks on the record and application data protocols: A number of vulnerabili-
ties have been discovered in these protocols, leading to patches to counter the 
new threats. As a recent example, in 2011, researchers Thai Duong and Juliano 
Rizzo demonstrated a proof of concept called BEAST (Browser Exploit Against 
SSL/TLS) that turned what had been considered only a theoretical vulnerability 

17.2 / TRANSPORT LAYER SECURITY 565
into a practical attack [GOOD11]. BEAST leverages a type of cryptographic 
attack called a chosen-plaintext attack. The attacker mounts the attack by 
choosing a guess for the plaintext that is associated with a known ciphertext. The 
researchers developed a practical algorithm for launching successful attacks. 
Subsequent patches were able to thwart this attack. The authors of the BEAST 
attack are also the creators of the 2012 CRIME (Compression Ratio Info-leak 
Made Easy) attack, which can allow an attacker to recover the content of web 
cookies when data compression is used along with TLS [GOOD12]. When used 
to recover the content of secret authentication cookies, it allows an attacker to 
perform session hijacking on an authenticated web session.
 
■Attacks on the PKI: Checking the validity of X.509 certificates is an activity 
subject to a variety of attacks, both in the context of SSL/TLS and elsewhere. 
For example, [GEOR12] demonstrated that commonly used libraries for 
SSL/TLS suffer from vulnerable certificate validation implementations. The 
 authors revealed weaknesses in the source code of OpenSSL, GnuTLS, JSSE, 
ApacheHttpClient, Weberknecht, cURL, PHP, Python and applications built 
upon or with these products.
 
■Other attacks: [MEYE13] lists a number of attacks that do not fit into any of 
the preceding categories. One example is an attack announced in 2011 by the 
German hacker group The Hackers Choice, which is a DoS attack [KUMA11]. 
The attack creates a heavy processing load on a server by overwhelming the 
target with SSL/TLS handshake requests. Boosting system load is done by 
establishing new connections or using renegotiation. Assuming that the major-
ity of computation during a handshake is done by the server, the attack creates 
more system load on the server than on the source device, leading to a DoS. 
The server is forced to continuously recompute random numbers and keys.
The history of attacks and countermeasures for SSL/TLS is representative of 
that for other Internet-based protocols. A “perfect” protocol and a “perfect” imple-
mentation strategy are never achieved. A constant back-and-forth between threats 
and countermeasures determines the evolution of Internet-based protocols.
TLSv1.3
In 2014, the IETF TLS working group began work on a version 1.3 of TLS. The 
primary aim is to improve the security of TLS. As of this writing, TLSv1.3 is still 
in a draft stage, but the final standard is likely to be very close to the current draft. 
Among the significant changes from version 1.2 are the following:
 
■TLSv1.3 removes support for a number of options and functions. Remov-
ing code that implements functions no longer needed reduces the chances 
of potentially dangerous coding errors and reduces the attack surface. The 
deleted items include:
–Compression
–Ciphers that do not offer authenticated encryption
–Static RSA and DH key exchange
–32-bit timestamp as part of the Random parameter in the client_hello 
message

566  CHAPTER 17 / TRANSPORT-LEVEL SECURITY
–Renegotiation
–Change Cipher Spec Protocol
–RC4
–Use of MD5 and SHA-224 hashes with signatures
 
■TLSv1.3 uses Diffie–Hellman or Elliptic Curve Diffie–Hellman for key 
exchange and does not permit RSA. The danger with RSA is that if the private 
key is compromised, all handshakes using these cipher suites will be compro-
mised. With DH or ECDH, a new key is negotiated for each handshake.
 
■TLSv1.3 allows for a “1 round trip time” handshake by changing the order of 
message sent with establishing a secure connection. The client sends a  Client 
Key Exchange message containing its cryptographic parameters for key estab-
lishment before a cipher suite has been negotiated. This enables a server 
to  calculate keys for encryption and authentication before sending its first 
response. Reducing the number of packets sent during this handshake phase 
speeds up the process and reduces the attack surface.
These changes should improve the efficiency and security of TLS.
 17.3 HTTPS
HTTPS (HTTP over SSL) refers to the combination of HTTP and SSL to imple-
ment secure communication between a Web browser and a Web server. The HTTPS 
capability is built into all modern Web browsers. Its use depends on the Web server 
supporting HTTPS communication. For example, some search engines do not sup-
port HTTPS.
The principal difference seen by a user of a Web browser is that URL (uniform 
resource locator) addresses begin with https:// rather than http://. A normal HTTP 
connection uses port 80. If HTTPS is specified, port 443 is used, which invokes SSL.
When HTTPS is used, the following elements of the communication are 
encrypted:
 
■URL of the requested document
 
■Contents of the document
 
■Contents of browser forms (filled in by browser user)
 
■Cookies sent from browser to server and from server to browser
 
■Contents of HTTP header
HTTPS is documented in RFC 2818, HTTP Over TLS. There is no fundamen-
tal change in using HTTP over either SSL or TLS, and both implementations are 
referred to as HTTPS.
Connection Initiation
For HTTPS, the agent acting as the HTTP client also acts as the TLS client. The 
client initiates a connection to the server on the appropriate port and then sends 
the TLS ClientHello to begin the TLS handshake. When the TLS handshake has 

19.3 / EMAIL THREATS AND COMPREHENSIVE EMAIL SECURITY 625
the local model for the representation of some form of information. Examples 
include a UNIX-style text file, or a Sun raster image, or a VMS indexed file, and 
audio data in a system-dependent format stored only in memory. In  essence, 
the data are created in the native form that corresponds to the type specified 
by the media type.
 
■Canonical form: The entire body, including out-of-band information such as 
record lengths and possibly file attribute information, is converted to a univer-
sal canonical form. The specific media type of the body as well as its associated 
attributes dictates the nature of the canonical form that is used. Conversion to 
the proper canonical form may involve character set conversion, transforma-
tion of audio data, compression, or various other operations specific to the 
various media types.
 19.3 EMAIL THREATS AND COMPREHENSIVE EMAIL SECURITY
For both organizations and individuals, email is both pervasive and especially vul-
nerable to a wide range of security threats. In general terms, email security threats 
can be classified as follows:
 
■Authenticity-related threats: Could result in unauthorized access to an enter-
prise’s email system.
 
■Integrity-related threats: Could result in unauthorized modification of email 
content.
 
■Confidentiality-related threats: Could result in unauthorized disclosure of 
 sensitive information.
 
■Availability-related threats: Could prevent end users from being able to send 
or receive email.
A useful list of specific email threats, together with approaches to mitigation, 
is provided in NIST SP 800-177 (Trustworthy Email, September 2015) and is shown 
in Table 19.3.
SP 800-177 recommends use of a variety of standardized protocols as a means 
for countering these threats. These include:
 
■STARTTLS: An SMTP security extension that provides authentication, integ-
rity, non-repudiation (via digital signatures) and confidentiality (via encryp-
tion) for the entire SMTP message by running SMTP over TLS.
 
■S/MIME: Provides authentication, integrity, non-repudiation (via digital 
 signatures) and confidentiality (via encryption) of the message body carried 
in SMTP messages.
 
■DNS Security Extensions (DNSSEC): Provides authentication and integ-
rity protection of DNS data, and is an underlying tool used by various email 
 security protocols.
 
■DNS-based Authentication of Named Entities (DANE): Is designed to over-
come problems in the certificate authority (CA) system by providing an 
 alternative channel for authenticating public keys based on DNSSEC, with the 

626  CHAPTER 19 / ELECTRONIC MAIL SECURITY
Threat
Impact on Purported 
Sender
Impact on Receiver
Mitigation
Email sent by 
unauthorized MTA in 
enterprise (e.g., malware 
botnet)
Loss of reputation, valid 
email from enterprise 
may be blocked as 
possible spam/phishing 
attack.
UBE and/or email 
containing malicious 
links may be delivered 
into user inboxes.
Deployment of domain-
based authentication 
techniques. Use of 
digital signatures over 
email.
Email message sent 
using spoofed or 
unregistered sending 
domain
Loss of reputation, valid 
email from enterprise 
may be blocked as 
possible spam/phishing 
attack.
UBE and/or email 
containing malicious 
links may be delivered 
into user inboxes.
Deployment of domain-
based authentication 
techniques. Use of 
digital signatures over 
email.
Email message sent 
using forged sending 
address or email address 
(i.e., phishing, spear 
phishing)
Loss of reputation, valid 
email from enterprise 
may be blocked as 
possible spam/phishing 
attack.
UBE and/or email 
containing malicious 
links may be delivered. 
Users may inadvertently 
divulge sensitive 
information or PII.
Deployment of domain-
based authentication 
techniques. Use of 
digital signatures over 
email.
Email modified in transit
Leak of sensitive 
information or PII.
Leak of sensitive 
information, altered 
message may contain 
malicious information.
Use of TLS to encrypt 
email transfer between 
servers. Use of end-to-
end email encryption.
Disclosure of sensitive 
information (e.g., PII) 
via monitoring and 
capturing of email traffic
Leak of sensitive 
information or PII.
Leak of sensitive 
information, altered 
message may contain 
malicious information.
Use of TLS to encrypt 
email transfer between 
servers. Use of end-to-
end email encryption.
Unsolicited Bulk Email 
(UBE) (i.e., spam)
None, unless purported 
sender is spoofed.
UBE and/or email 
containing malicious 
links may be delivered 
into user inboxes.
Techniques to address 
UBE.
DoS/DDoS attack 
against an enterprises’ 
email servers
Inability to send email.
Inability to receive 
email.
Multiple mail servers, 
use of cloud-based email 
providers.
Table 19.3 Email Threats and Mitigations
result that the same trust relationships used to certify IP addresses are used to 
certify servers operating on those addresses.
 
■Sender Policy Framework (SPF): Uses the Domain Name System (DNS) to 
allow domain owners to create records that associate the domain name with a 
specific IP address range of authorized message senders. It is a simple matter 
for receivers to check the SPF TXT record in the DNS to confirm that the pur-
ported sender of a message is permitted to use that source address and reject 
mail that does not come from an authorized IP address.
 
■DomainKeys Identified Mail (DKIM): Enables an MTA to sign selected 
 headers and the body of a message. This validates the source domain of the 
mail and provides message body integrity.
 
■Domain-based Message Authentication, Reporting, and Conformance 
(DMARC): Lets senders know the proportionate effectiveness of their SPF 
and DKIM policies, and signals to receivers what action should be taken in 
various individual and bulk attack scenarios.

19.4 / S/MIME 627
Figure 19.4 shows how these components interact to provide message authen-
ticity and integrity. Not shown, for simplicity, is that S/MIME also provides message 
confidentiality by encrypting messages.
 19.4 S/MIME
Secure/Multipurpose Internet Mail Extension (S/MIME) is a security enhancement 
to the MIME Internet email format standard based on technology from RSA Data 
Security. S/MIME is a complex capability that is defined in a number of documents. 
The most important documents relevant to S/MIME include the following:
 
■RFC 5750, S/MIME Version 3.2 Certificate Handling: Specifies conventions 
for X.509 certificate usage by (S/MIME) v3.2.
Figure 19.4  The Interrelationship of DNSSEC, SPF, DKIM, DMARC, DANE, and  
S/MIME for Assuring Message Authenticity and Integrity
msg
msg
sig
msg
sig
msg
sig
Sender
MUA
Sender’s S/MIME
signing key
(private key)
DKIM
signature
DKIM TXT RR provides
sending MTA’s public key
to receiving MTA
DMARC TXT tells receiving
MTA that sender uses
DKIM and SPF
DANE TLSA RR
specifies SMTP
TLS certificate
Receiver MUA
verifies S/MIME
signature
DNSSEC secured
DNSSEC secured
MTA’s DKIM
signing key
DANE = DNS-based Authentication of Named Entities
DKIM = DomainKeys Identified Mail
DMARC = Domain-based Message Authentication, Reporting, and Conformance
DNSSEC = Domain Name System Security Extensions
SPF = Sender Policy Framework
S/MIME = Secure Multi-Purpose Internet Mail Extensions
TLSA RR = Transport Layer Security Authentication Resource Record
SPF TXT specfies
sender’s IP address
Sender
DNS
Receiver
DNS
Receiver
MUA
Sending
MTA
Receiving
MTA

628  CHAPTER 19 / ELECTRONIC MAIL SECURITY
 
■RFC 5751, S/MIME) Version 3.2 Message Specification: The principal defining 
document for S/MIME message creation and processing.
 
■RFC 4134, Examples of S/MIME Messages: Gives examples of message  bodies 
formatted using S/MIME.
 
■RFC 2634, Enhanced Security Services for S/MIME: Describes four optional 
security service extensions for S/MIME.
 
■RFC 5652, Cryptographic Message Syntax (CMS): Describes the Crypto-
graphic Message Syntax (CMS). This syntax is used to digitally sign, digest, 
authenticate, or encrypt arbitrary message content.
 
■RFC 3370, CMS Algorithms: Describes the conventions for using several 
 cryptographic algorithms with the CMS.
 
■RFC 5752, Multiple Signatures in CMS: Describes the use of multiple, parallel 
signatures for a message.
 
■RFC 1847, Security Multiparts for MIME—Multipart/Signed and Multipart/
Encrypted: Defines a framework within which security services may be applied 
to MIME body parts. The use of a digital signature is relevant to S/MIME, as 
explained subsequently.
Operational Description
S/MIME provides for four message-related services: authentication, confidential-
ity, compression, and email compatibility (Table 19.4). This subsection provides 
an overview. We then look in more detail at this capability by examining message 
 formats and message preparation.
AUTHENTICATION Authentication is provided by means of a digital  signature, using 
the general scheme discussed in Chapter 13 and illustrated in Figure 13.1. Most 
commonly RSA with SHA-256 is used. The sequence is as follows:
1. The sender creates a message.
2. SHA-256 is used to generate a 256-bit message digest of the message.
Function
Typical Algorithm
Typical Action
Digital signature
RSA/SHA-256
A hash code of a message is created using SHA-256. 
This message digest is encrypted using SHA-256 
with the sender’s private key and included with 
the message.
Message encryption
AES-128 with CBC
A message is encrypted using AES-128 with CBC 
with a one-time session key generated by the 
sender. The session key is encrypted using RSA 
with the recipient’s public key and included with 
the message.
Compression
unspecified
A message may be compressed for storage or 
transmission.
Email compatibility
Radix-64 conversion
To provide transparency for email applications, an 
encrypted message may be converted to an ASCII 
string using radix-64 conversion.
Table 19.4 Summary of S/MIME Services

19.4 / S/MIME 629
3. The message digest is encrypted with RSA using the sender’s private key, and 
the result is appended to the message. Also appended is identifying information 
for the signer, which will enable the receiver to retrieve the  signer’s public key.
4. The receiver uses RSA with the sender’s public key to decrypt and recover the 
message digest.
5. The receiver generates a new message digest for the message and compares 
it with the decrypted hash code. If the two match, the message is accepted as 
authentic.
The combination of SHA-256 and RSA provides an effective digital signature 
scheme. Because of the strength of RSA, the recipient is assured that only the pos-
sessor of the matching private key can generate the signature. Because of the strength 
of SHA-256, the recipient is assured that no one else could generate a new message 
that matches the hash code and, hence, the signature of the original message.
Although signatures normally are found attached to the message or file that 
they sign, this is not always the case: Detached signatures are supported. A  detached 
signature may be stored and transmitted separately from the message it signs. This 
is useful in several contexts. A user may wish to maintain a separate signature log 
of all messages sent or received. A detached signature of an executable program 
can detect subsequent virus infection. Finally, detached signatures can be used 
when more than one party must sign a document, such as a legal contract. Each 
person’s signature is independent and therefore is applied only to the document. 
Otherwise, signatures would have to be nested, with the second signer signing both 
the  document and the first signature, and so on.
CONFIDENTIALITY S/MIME provides confidentiality by encrypting messages. Most 
commonly AES with a 128-bit key is used, with the cipher block chaining (CBC) 
mode. The key itself is also encrypted, typically with RSA, as explained below.
As always, one must address the problem of key distribution. In S/MIME, 
each symmetric key, referred to as a content-encryption key, is used only once. That 
is, a new key is generated as a random number for each message. Because it is to be 
used only once, the content-encryption key is bound to the message and transmit-
ted with it. To protect the key, it is encrypted with the receiver’s public key. The 
sequence can be described as follows:
1. The sender generates a message and a random 128-bit number to be used as a 
content-encryption key for this message only.
2. The message is encrypted using the content-encryption key.
3. The content-encryption key is encrypted with RSA using the recipient’s public 
key and is attached to the message.
4. The receiver uses RSA with its private key to decrypt and recover the 
 content-encryption key.
5. The content-encryption key is used to decrypt the message.
Several observations may be made. First, to reduce encryption time, the com-
bination of symmetric and public-key encryption is used in preference to simply 
using public-key encryption to encrypt the message directly: Symmetric algorithms 

630  CHAPTER 19 / ELECTRONIC MAIL SECURITY
are substantially faster than asymmetric ones for a large block of content. Second, 
the use of the public-key algorithm solves the session-key distribution problem, 
because only the recipient is able to recover the session key that is bound to the 
message. Note that we do not need a session-key exchange protocol of the type 
discussed in Chapter 14,  because we are not beginning an ongoing session. Rather, 
each message is a one-time independent event with its own key. Furthermore, given 
the store-and-forward nature of electronic mail, the use of handshaking to assure 
that both sides have the same session key is not practical. Finally, the use of one-
time symmetric keys strengthens what is already a strong symmetric encryption 
 approach. Only a small amount of plaintext is encrypted with each key, and there is 
no relationship among the keys. Thus, to the extent that the public-key algorithm is 
secure, the entire scheme is secure.
CONFIDENTIALITY AND AUTHENTICATION As Figure 19.5 illustrates, both confi-
dentiality and encryption may be used for the same message. The figure shows a 
 sequence in which a signature is generated for the plaintext message and appended 
to the message. Then the plaintext message and signature are encrypted as a single 
block using symmetric encryption and the symmetric encryption key is encrypted 
using public-key encryption.
S/MIME allows the signing and message encryption operations to be per-
formed in either order. If signing is done first, the identity of the signer is hidden 
by the encryption. Plus, it is generally more convenient to store a signature with a 
plaintext version of a message. Furthermore, for purposes of third-party verifica-
tion, if the signature is performed first, a third party need not be concerned with the 
symmetric key when verifying the signature.
If encryption is done first, it is possible to verify a signature without exposing 
the message content. This can be useful in a context in which automatic signature 
verification is desired, as no private key material is required to verify a signature. 
However, in this case the recipient cannot determine any relationship between the 
signer and the unencrypted content of the message.
EMAIL COMPATIBILITY When S/MIME is used, at least part of the block to be trans-
mitted is encrypted. If only the signature service is used, then the message digest is 
encrypted (with the sender’s private key). If the confidentiality service is used, the 
message plus signature (if present) are encrypted (with a one-time symmetric key). 
Thus, part or all of the resulting block consists of a stream of arbitrary 8-bit octets. 
However, many electronic mail systems only permit the use of blocks consisting 
of ASCII text. To accommodate this restriction, S/MIME provides the service of 
converting the raw 8-bit binary stream to a stream of printable ASCII characters, 
a process referred to as 7-bit encoding.
The scheme typically used for this purpose is Base64 conversion. Each group 
of three octets of binary data is mapped into four ASCII characters. See Appendix 
X for a description.
One noteworthy aspect of the Base64 algorithm is that it blindly converts the 
input stream to Base64 format regardless of content, even if the input happens to 
be ASCII text. Thus, if a message is signed but not encrypted and the conversion 
is  applied to the entire block, the output will be unreadable to the casual observer, 
which provides a certain level of confidentiality.

19.4 / S/MIME 631
RFC 5751 also recommends that even if outer 7-bit encoding is not used, the 
original MIME content should be 7-bit encoded. The reason for this is that it allows 
the MIME entity to be handled in any environment without changing it. For exam-
ple, a trusted gateway might remove the encryption, but not the signature, of a mes-
sage, and then forward the signed message on to the end recipient so that they can 
verify the signatures directly. If the transport internal to the site is not 8-bit clean, 
such as on a wide area network with a single mail gateway, verifying the signature 
will not be possible unless the original MIME entity was only 7-bit data.
COMPRESSION S/MIME also offers the ability to compress a message. This has the 
benefit of saving space both for email transmission and for file storage. Compression 
Figure 19.5 Simplified S/MIME Functional Flow
Sign
(e.g., RSA/
SHA-256)
Sender’s
private key
(a) Sender signs, then encrypts message
(b) Receiver decrypts message, then verifies sender’s signature
One-time
secret key
Encrypt
(e.g,
AES-128/
CBC 
Encrypt
(e.g., RSA)
msg
msg
sig
sig
sig
msg
sig
Receiver’s
public key
Sender’s
public key
Decrypt
(e.g., RSA)
Receiver’s
private key
Secret key
generated by
sender
Decrypt
(e.g,
AES-128/
CBC
Verify
signature
(e.g., RSA/
SHA-256)
msg
msg

632  CHAPTER 19 / ELECTRONIC MAIL SECURITY
can be applied in any order with respect to the signing and message encryption 
 operations. RFC 5751 provides the following guidelines:
 
■Compression of binary encoded encrypted data is discouraged, since it will not 
yield significant compression. Base64 encrypted data could very well benefit, 
however.
 
■If a lossy compression algorithm is used with signing, you will need to  compress 
first, then sign.
S/MIME Message Content Types
S/MIME uses the following message content types, which are defined in RFC 5652, 
Cryptographic Message Syntax:
 
■Data: Refers to the inner MIME-encoded message content, which may then 
be encapsulated in a SignedData, EnvelopedData, or CompressedData con-
tent type.
 
■SignedData: Used to apply a digital signature to a message.
 
■EnvelopedData: This consists of encrypted content of any type and encrypted-
content encryption keys for one or more recipients.
 
■CompressedData: Used to apply data compression to a message.
The Data content type is also used for a procedure known as clear signing. 
For clear signing, a digital signature is calculated for a MIME-encoded message and 
the two parts, the message and signature, form a multipart MIME message. Unlike 
SignedData, which involves encapsulating the message and signature in a special 
format, clear-signed messages can be read and their signatures verified by email 
entities that do not implement S/MIME.
Approved Cryptographic Algorithms
Table 19.5 summarizes the cryptographic algorithms used in S/MIME. S/MIME 
uses the following terminology taken from RFC 2119 (Key Words for use in RFCs to 
Indicate Requirement Levels, March 1997) to specify the requirement level:
 
■MUST: The definition is an absolute requirement of the specification. An 
 implementation must include this feature or function to be in conformance 
with the specification.
 
■SHOULD: There may exist valid reasons in particular circumstances to ignore 
this feature or function, but it is recommended that an implementation include 
the feature or function.
The S/MIME specification includes a discussion of the procedure for deciding 
which content encryption algorithm to use. In essence, a sending agent has two deci-
sions to make. First, the sending agent must determine if the receiving agent is  capable 
of decrypting using a given encryption algorithm. Second, if the receiving agent is only 
capable of accepting weakly encrypted content, the sending agent must decide if it is 
acceptable to send using weak encryption. To support this decision process, a sending 
agent may announce its decrypting capabilities in order of preference for any message 
that it sends out. A receiving agent may store that information for future use.

19.4 / S/MIME 633
The following rules, in the following order, should be followed by a sending agent.
1. If the sending agent has a list of preferred decrypting capabilities from an 
 intended recipient, it SHOULD choose the first (highest preference) capabil-
ity on the list that it is capable of using.
2. If the sending agent has no such list of capabilities from an intended recipient 
but has received one or more messages from the recipient, then the outgoing 
message SHOULD use the same encryption algorithm as was used on the last 
signed and encrypted message received from that intended recipient.
3. If the sending agent has no knowledge about the decryption capabilities of the 
intended recipient and is willing to risk that the recipient may not be able to 
decrypt the message, then the sending agent SHOULD use triple DES.
4. If the sending agent has no knowledge about the decryption capabilities of the 
intended recipient and is not willing to risk that the recipient may not be able 
to decrypt the message, then the sending agent MUST use RC2/40.
If a message is to be sent to multiple recipients and a common encryption 
 algorithm cannot be selected for all, then the sending agent will need to send two 
messages. However, in that case, it is important to note that the security of the 
 message is made vulnerable by the transmission of one copy with lower security.
S/MIME Messages
S/MIME makes use of a number of new MIME content types. All of the new applica-
tion types use the designation PKCS. This refers to a set of public-key cryptography 
specifications issued by RSA Laboratories and made available for the S/MIME effort.
Function
Requirement
Create a message digest to be used in 
forming a digital signature.
MUST support SHA-256
SHOULD support SHA-1
Receiver SHOULD support MD5 for backward compatibility
Use message digest to form a digital 
signature.
MUST support RSA with SHA-256
SHOULD support
—DSA with SHA-256
—RSASSA-PSS with SHA-256
—RSA with SHA-1
—DSA with SHA-1
—RSA with MD5
Encrypt session key for transmission with 
a message.
MUST support RSA encryption
SHOULD support
—RSAES-OAEP
—Diffie–Hellman ephemeral-static mode
Encrypt message for transmission with a 
one-time session key.
MUST support AES-128 with CBC
SHOULD support
—AES-192 CBC and AES-256 CBC
—Triple DES CBC
Table 19.5 Cryptographic Algorithms Used in S/MIME

634  CHAPTER 19 / ELECTRONIC MAIL SECURITY
We examine each of these in turn after first looking at the general procedures 
for S/MIME message preparation.
SECURING A MIME ENTITY S/MIME secures a MIME entity with a signature, 
 encryption, or both. A MIME entity may be an entire message (except for the RFC 
5322 headers), or if the MIME content type is multipart, then a MIME entity is one 
or more of the subparts of the message. The MIME entity is prepared according 
to the normal rules for MIME message preparation. Then the MIME entity plus 
some security-related data, such as algorithm identifiers and certificates, are pro-
cessed by S/MIME to produce what is known as a PKCS object. A PKCS object is 
then treated as message content and wrapped in MIME (provided with appropriate 
MIME headers). This process should become clear as we look at specific objects 
and provide examples.
In all cases, the message to be sent is converted to canonical form. In par-
ticular, for a given type and subtype, the appropriate canonical form is used for the 
message content. For a multipart message, the appropriate canonical form is used 
for each subpart.
The use of transfer encoding requires special attention. For most cases, the 
result of applying the security algorithm will be to produce an object that is partially 
or totally represented in arbitrary binary data. This will then be wrapped in an outer 
MIME message and transfer encoding can be applied at that point, typically base64. 
However, in the case of a multipart signed message (described in more detail later), 
the message content in one of the subparts is unchanged by the security process. 
Unless that content is 7 bit, it should be transfer encoded using base64 or quoted-
printable so that there is no danger of altering the content to which the signature 
was applied.
We now look at each of the S/MIME content types.
ENVELOPEDDATA An application/pkcs7-mime subtype is used for one of four cat-
egories of S/MIME processing, each with a unique smime-type parameter. In all 
cases, the resulting entity, (referred to as an object) is represented in a form known 
as Basic Encoding Rules (BER), which is defined in ITU-T Recommendation 
X.209. The BER format consists of arbitrary octet strings and is therefore binary 
data. Such an object should be transfer encoded with base64 in the outer MIME 
message. We first look at envelopedData.
The steps for preparing an envelopedData MIME entity are:
1. Generate a pseudorandom session key for a particular symmetric encryption 
algorithm (RC2/40 or triple DES).
2. For each recipient, encrypt the session key with the recipient’s public RSA key.
3. For each recipient, prepare a block known as RecipientInfo that contains 
an identifier of the recipient’s public-key certificate,1 an identifier of the 
 algorithm used to encrypt the session key, and the encrypted session key.
4. Encrypt the message content with the session key.
1This is an X.509 certificate, discussed later in this section.

19.4 / S/MIME 635
The RecipientInfo blocks followed by the encrypted content constitute the 
envelopedData. This information is then encoded into base64. A sample message 
(excluding the RFC 5322 headers) is given below.
Content-Type: application/pkcs7-mime; smime-type=enveloped-
data; name=smime.p7m
Content-Transfer-Encoding: base64
Content-Disposition: attachment; filename=smime.p7m
rfvbnj756tbBghyHhHUujhJhjH77n8HHGT9HG4VQpfyF467GhIGfHfYT6
7n8HHGghyHhHUujhJh4VQpfyF467GhIGfHfYGTrfvbnjT6jH7756tbB9H
f8HHGTrfvhJhjH776tbB9HG4VQbnj7567GhIGfHfYT6ghyHhHUujpfyF4
0GhIGfHfQbnj756YT64V
To recover the encrypted message, the recipient first strips off the base64 
 encoding. Then the recipient’s private key is used to recover the session key. Finally, 
the message content is decrypted with the session key.
SIGNEDDATA The signedData smime-type can be used with one or more signers. 
For clarity, we confine our description to the case of a single digital signature. The 
steps for preparing a signedData MIME entity are as follows.
1. Select a message digest algorithm (SHA or MD5).
2. Compute the message digest (hash function) of the content to be signed.
3. Encrypt the message digest with the signer’s private key.
4. Prepare a block known as SignerInfo that contains the signer’s public-key 
certificate, an identifier of the message digest algorithm, an identifier of the 
 algorithm used to encrypt the message digest, and the encrypted message 
digest.
The signedData entity consists of a series of blocks, including a message 
digest algorithm identifier, the message being signed, and SignerInfo. The 
signedData entity may also include a set of public-key certificates sufficient to 
constitute a chain from a recognized root or top-level certification authority to the 
signer. This information is then encoded into base64. A sample message (excluding 
the RFC 5322 headers) is the following.
Content-Type: application/pkcs7-mime; smime-type=signed-
data; name=smime.p7m
Content-Transfer-Encoding: base64
Content-Disposition: attachment; filename=smime.p7m
567GhIGfHfYT6ghyHhHUujpfyF4f8HHGTrfvhJhjH776tbB9HG4VQbnj7
77n8HHGT9HG4VQpfyF467GhIGfHfYT6rfvbnj756tbBghyHhHUujhJhjH
HUujhJh4VQpfyF467GhIGfHfYGTrfvbnjT6jH7756tbB9H7n8HHGghyHh
6YT64V0GhIGfHfQbnj75

636  CHAPTER 19 / ELECTRONIC MAIL SECURITY
To recover the signed message and verify the signature, the recipient first strips 
off the base64 encoding. Then the signer’s public key is used to decrypt the message 
digest. The recipient independently computes the message digest and  compares it to 
the decrypted message digest to verify the signature.
CLEAR SIGNING Clear signing is achieved using the multipart content type with 
a signed subtype. As was mentioned, this signing process does not involve trans-
forming the message to be signed, so that the message is sent “in the clear.” Thus, 
recipients with MIME capability but not S/MIME capability are able to read the 
 incoming message.
A multipart/signed message has two parts. The first part can be any MIME 
type but must be prepared so that it will not be altered during transfer from source 
to destination. This means that if the first part is not 7 bit, then it needs to be  encoded 
using base64 or quoted-printable. Then this part is processed in the same manner 
as signedData, but in this case an object with signedData format is created that 
has an empty message content field. This object is a detached signature. It is then 
transfer encoded using base64 to become the second part of the multipart/signed 
message. This second part has a MIME content type of application and a subtype of 
pkcs7-signature. Here is a sample message:
Content-Type: multipart/signed;
protocol=”application/pkcs7-signature”;
micalg=sha1; boundary=boundary42
—boundary42
Content-Type: text/plain
This is a clear-signed message.
—boundary42
Content-Type: application/pkcs7-signature; name=smime.p7s
Content-Transfer-Encoding: base64
Content-Disposition: attachment; filename=smime.p7s
ghyHhHUujhJhjH77n8HHGTrfvbnj756tbB9HG4VQpfyF467GhIGfHfYT6
4VQpfyF467GhIGfHfYT6jH77n8HHGghyHhHUujhJh756tbB9HGTrfvbnj
n8HHGTrfvhJhjH776tbB9HG4VQbnj7567GhIGfHfYT6ghyHhHUujpfyF4
7GhIGfHfYT64VQbnj756
—boundary42—
The protocol parameter indicates that this is a two-part clear-signed entity. 
The micalg parameter indicates the type of message digest used. The receiver can 
verify the signature by taking the message digest of the first part and comparing this 
to the message digest recovered from the signature in the second part.
REGISTRATION REQUEST Typically, an application or user will apply to a certi-
fication authority for a public-key certificate. The application/pkcs10 S/MIME 

19.4 / S/MIME 637
 entity is used to transfer a certification request. The certification  request 
 includes  certificationRequestInfo block, followed by an  identifier 
of the public-key  encryption algorithm, followed by the signature of the 
 certificationRequestInfo block, made using the sender’s private key. The 
certificationRequestInfo block includes a name of the certificate subject 
(the entity whose public key is to be certified) and a bit-string representation of the 
user’s public key.
CERTIFICATES-ONLY MESSAGE A message containing only certificates or a certificate 
revocation list (CRL) can be sent in response to a registration request. The message 
is an application/pkcs7-mime type/subtype with an smime-type parameter of degen-
erate. The steps involved are the same as those for creating a signedData  message, 
except that there is no message content and the signerInfo field is empty.
S/MIME Certificate Processing
S/MIME uses public-key certificates that conform to version 3 of X.509 (see 
Chapter 14). S/MIME managers and/or users must configure each client with a list of 
trusted keys and with certificate revocation lists. That is, the responsibility is local for 
maintaining the certificates needed to verify incoming signatures and to encrypt outgo-
ing messages. On the other hand, the certificates are signed by certification authorities.
USER AGENT ROLE An S/MIME user has several key management functions to 
perform.
 
■Key generation: The user of some related administrative utility (e.g., one 
 associated with LAN management) MUST be capable of generating separate 
Diffie–Hellman and DSS key pairs and SHOULD be capable of generating 
RSA key pairs. Each key pair MUST be generated from a good source of 
nondeterministic random input and be protected in a secure fashion. A user 
agent SHOULD generate RSA key pairs with a length in the range of 768 to 
1024 bits and MUST NOT generate a length of less than 512 bits.
 
■Registration: A user’s public key must be registered with a certification 
 authority in order to receive an X.509 public-key certificate.
 
■Certificate storage and retrieval: A user requires access to a local list of certifi-
cates in order to verify incoming signatures and to encrypt outgoing messages. 
Such a list could be maintained by the user or by some local administrative 
entity on behalf of a number of users.
Enhanced Security Services
RFC 2634 defines four enhanced security services for S/MIME:
 
■Signed receipts: A signed receipt may be requested in a SignedData  object. 
Returning a signed receipt provides proof of delivery to the originator of a 
message and allows the originator to demonstrate to a third party that the 
 recipient received the message. In essence, the recipient signs the entire 
 original message plus the original (sender’s) signature and appends the new 
signature to form a new S/MIME message.

638  CHAPTER 19 / ELECTRONIC MAIL SECURITY
 
■Security labels: A security label may be included in the authenticated  attributes 
of a SignedData object. A security label is a set of security information 
 regarding the sensitivity of the content that is protected by S/MIME encapsu-
lation. The labels may be used for access control, by indicating which users are 
permitted access to an object. Other uses include priority (secret, confidential, 
restricted, and so on) or role based, describing which kind of people can see 
the information (e.g., patient’s health-care team, medical billing agents).
 
■Secure mailing lists: When a user sends a message to multiple recipients, a 
certain amount of per-recipient processing is required, including the use of 
each recipient’s public key. The user can be relieved of this work by employ-
ing the services of an S/MIME Mail List Agent (MLA). An MLA can take a 
single incoming message, perform the recipient-specific encryption for each 
recipient, and forward the message. The originator of a message need only 
send the message to the MLA with encryption performed using the MLA’s 
public key.
 
■Signing certificates: This service is used to securely bind a sender’s certificate 
to their signature through a signing certificate attribute.
 19.5 PRETTY GOOD PRIVACY
An alternative email security protocol is Pretty Good Privacy (PGP), which has 
 essentially the same functionality as S/MIME. PGP was created by Phil Zimmerman 
and implemented as a product first released in 1991. It was made available free of 
charge and became quite popular for personal use. The initial PGP protocol was 
proprietary and used some encryption algorithms with intellectual property restric-
tions. In 1996, version 5.x of PGP was defined in IETF RFC 1991, PGP Message 
Exchange Formats. Subsequently, OpenPGP was developed as a new standard 
protocol based on PGP version 5.x. OpenPGP is defined in RFC 4880 (OpenPGP 
Message Format, November 2007) and RFC 3156 (MIME Security with OpenPGP, 
August 2001).
There are two significant differences between S/MIME and OpenPGP:
 
■Key Certification: S/MIME uses X.509 certificates that are issued by Certificate 
Authorities (or local agencies that have been delegated authority by a CA to 
issue certificates). In OpenPGP, users generate their own OpenPGP public 
and private keys and then solicit signatures for their public keys from individu-
als or organizations to which they are known. Whereas X.509 certificates are 
trusted if there is a valid PKIX chain to a trusted root, an OpenPGP public key 
is trusted if it is signed by another OpenPGP public key that is trusted by the 
recipient. This is called the Web-of-Trust.
 
■Key Distribution: OpenPGP does not include the sender’s public key with 
each message, so it is necessary for recipients of OpenPGP messages to sepa-
rately obtain the sender’s public key in order to verify the message. Many 
 organizations post OpenPGP keys on TLS-protected websites: People who 
wish to verify digital signatures or send these organizations encrypted mail 

19.6 / DNSSEC 639
need to manually download these keys and add them to their OpenPGP 
 clients. Keys may also be registered with the OpenPGP public key servers, 
which are servers that maintain a database of PGP public keys organized by 
email  address. Anyone may post a public key to the OpenPGP key servers, 
and that public key may contain any email address. There is no vetting of 
OpenPGP keys, so users must use the Web-of-Trust to decide whether to trust 
a given public key.
NIST 800-177 recommends the use of S/MIME rather than PGP because of 
the greater confidence in the CA system of verifying public keys.
Appendix P provides an overview of PGP.
 19.6 DNSSEC
DNS Security Extensions (DNSSEC) are used by several protocols that provide 
email security. This section provides a brief overview of the Domain Name System 
(DNS) and then looks at DNSSEC.
Domain Name System
DNS is a directory lookup service that provides a mapping between the name of a 
host on the Internet and its numeric IP address. DNS is essential to the functioning 
of the Internet. The DNS is used by MUAs and MTAs to find the address of the 
next hop server for mail delivery. Sending MTAs query DNS for the Mail Exchange 
Resource Record (MX RR) of the recipient’s domain (the right hand side of the 
“@” symbol) in order to find the receiving MTA to contact.
Four elements comprise the DNS:
 
■Domain name space: DNS uses a tree-structured name space to identify 
 resources on the Internet.
 
■DNS database: Conceptually, each node and leaf in the name space tree struc-
ture names a set of information (e.g., IP address, name server for this domain 
name) that is contained in resource record. The collection of all RRs is orga-
nized into a distributed database.
 
■Name servers: These are server programs that hold information about a por-
tion of the domain name tree structure and the associated RRs.
 
■Resolvers: These are programs that extract information from name servers in 
response to client requests. A typical client request is for an IP address corre-
sponding to a given domain name.
THE DNS DATABASE DNS is based on a hierarchical database containing resource 
records (RRs) that include the name, IP address, and other information about hosts. 
The key features of the database are as follows:
 
■Variable-depth hierarchy for names: DNS allows essentially unlimited levels 
and uses the period (.) as the level delimiter in printed names, as described 
earlier.
