11.1 / APPLICATIONS OF CRYPTOGRAPHIC HASH FUNCTIONS 341
 11.1 APPLICATIONS OF CRYPTOGRAPHIC HASH FUNCTIONS
Perhaps the most versatile cryptographic algorithm is the cryptographic hash func-
tion. It is used in a wide variety of security applications and Internet protocols. 
To better understand some of the requirements and security implications for cryp-
tographic hash functions, it is useful to look at the range of applications in which it 
is employed.
Message Authentication
Message authentication is a mechanism or service used to verify the integrity of 
a message. Message authentication assures that data received are exactly as sent 
(i.e., there is no modification, insertion, deletion, or replay). In many cases, there is 
a requirement that the authentication mechanism assures that purported identity of 
the sender is valid. When a hash function is used to provide message authentication, 
the hash function value is often referred to as a message digest.1
The essence of the use of a hash function for message integrity is as follows. 
The sender computes a hash value as a function of the bits in the message and trans-
mits both the hash value and the message. The receiver performs the same hash cal-
culation on the message bits and compares this value with the incoming hash value. 
Figure 11.1 Cryptographic Hash Function; h = H(M)
Message or data block M (variable length)
P, L
P, L = padding plus length field
L bits
Hash value h
(fixed length)
H
1The topic of this section is invariably referred to as message authentication. However, the concepts and 
techniques apply equally to data at rest. For example, authentication techniques can be applied to a file 
in storage to assure that the file is not tampered with.
MODULE 3

342  CHAPTER 11 / CRYPTOGRAPHIC HASH FUNCTIONS
If there is a mismatch, the receiver knows that the message (or possibly the hash 
value) has been altered (Figure 11.2a).
The hash value must be transmitted in a secure fashion. That is, the hash value 
must be protected so that if an adversary alters or replaces the message, it is not 
feasible for adversary to also alter the hash value to fool the receiver. This type 
of attack is shown in Figure 11.2b. In this example, Alice transmits a data block 
and  attaches a hash value. Darth intercepts the message, alters or replaces the data 
block, and calculates and attaches a new hash value. Bob receives the altered data 
with the new hash value and does not detect the change. To prevent this attack, the 
hash value generated by Alice must be protected.
Figure 11.2 Attack Against Hash Function
(b) Man-in-the-middle attack
Alice
Darth
Bob
Bob
Alice
COMPARE
data
data
data
H
data
data
data
H
H
(a) Use of hash function to check data integrity
COMPARE
data
data
data
H
H

11.1 / APPLICATIONS OF CRYPTOGRAPHIC HASH FUNCTIONS 343
Figure 11.3 illustrates a variety of ways in which a hash code can be used to 
provide message authentication, as follows.
a. The message plus concatenated hash code is encrypted using symmetric 
encryption. Because only A and B share the secret key, the message must have 
come from A and has not been altered. The hash code provides the structure or 
redundancy required to achieve authentication. Because encryption is applied 
to the entire message plus hash code, confidentiality is also provided.
b. Only the hash code is encrypted, using symmetric encryption. This reduces the 
processing burden for those applications that do not require confidentiality.
Figure 11.3 Simplified Examples of the Use of a Hash Function for Message Authentication
E
K
M
H
| |
D
K
M
H(M )
H
Compare
(a)
M
H
| |
K
(b)
M
D
H
Compare
K
E
E(K, [M || H(M )])
E(K, H(M ))
Destination B
Source A
| |
S
M
H
| |
S
(c)
| |
M
H(M || S)
H(M || S)
H
Compare
M
H
| |
S
(d)
| |
E
K
| |
S
H
Compare
M
D
K
E(K, [M || H(M || S)])

344  CHAPTER 11 / CRYPTOGRAPHIC HASH FUNCTIONS
c. It is possible to use a hash function but no encryption for message authentica-
tion. The technique assumes that the two communicating parties share a common 
secret value S. A computes the hash value over the concatenation of M and S and 
appends the resulting hash value to M. Because B possesses S, it can recompute 
the hash value to verify. Because the secret value itself is not sent, an opponent 
cannot modify an intercepted message and cannot generate a false message.
d. Confidentiality can be added to the approach of method (c) by encrypting the 
entire message plus the hash code.
When confidentiality is not required, method (b) has an advantage over 
methods (a) and (d), which encrypts the entire message, in that less computa-
tion is required. Nevertheless, there has been growing interest in techniques that 
avoid encryption (Figure 11.3c). Several reasons for this interest are pointed out 
in [TSUD92].
 
■Encryption software is relatively slow. Even though the amount of data to be 
encrypted per message is small, there may be a steady stream of messages into 
and out of a system.
 
■Encryption hardware costs are not negligible. Low-cost chip implementations 
of DES are available, but the cost adds up if all nodes in a network must have 
this capability.
 
■Encryption hardware is optimized toward large data sizes. For small blocks of 
data, a high proportion of the time is spent in initialization/invocation overhead.
 
■Encryption algorithms may be covered by patents, and there is a cost associ-
ated with licensing their use.
More commonly, message authentication is achieved using a message 
 authentication code (MAC), also known as a keyed hash function. Typically, MACs 
are used between two parties that share a secret key to authenticate information 
 exchanged between those parties. A MAC function takes as input a secret key and 
a data block and produces a hash value, referred to as the MAC, which is associ-
ated with the protected message. If the integrity of the message needs to be checked, 
the MAC function can be applied to the message and the result compared with the 
 associated MAC value. An attacker who alters the message will be unable to alter the 
associated MAC value without knowledge of the secret key. Note that the verifying 
party also knows who the sending party is because no one else knows the secret key.
Note that the combination of hashing and encryption results in an overall 
function that is, in fact, a MAC (Figure 11.3b). That is, E(K, H(M)) is a function of 
a variable-length message M and a secret key K, and it produces a fixed-size output 
that is secure against an opponent who does not know the secret key. In practice, 
specific MAC algorithms are designed that are generally more efficient than an 
 encryption algorithm.
We discuss MACs in Chapter 12.
Digital Signatures
Another important application, which is similar to the message authentication 
 application, is the digital signature. The operation of the digital signature is similar 
to that of the MAC. In the case of the digital signature, the hash value of a message 

11.1 / APPLICATIONS OF CRYPTOGRAPHIC HASH FUNCTIONS 345
is encrypted with a user’s private key. Anyone who knows the user’s public key can 
verify the integrity of the message that is associated with the digital signature. In 
this case, an attacker who wishes to alter the message would need to know the user’s 
private key. As we shall see in Chapter 14, the implications of digital signatures go 
beyond just message authentication.
Figure 11.4 illustrates, in a simplified fashion, how a hash code is used to 
 provide a digital signature.
a. The hash code is encrypted, using public-key encryption with the sender’s 
 private key. As with Figure 11.3b, this provides authentication. It also provides 
a digital signature, because only the sender could have produced the encrypted 
hash code. In fact, this is the essence of the digital signature technique.
b. If confidentiality as well as a digital signature is desired, then the message 
plus the private-key-encrypted hash code can be encrypted using a symmetric 
 secret key. This is a common technique.
Other Applications
Hash functions are commonly used to create a one-way password file. Chapter 21 
explains a scheme in which a hash of a password is stored by an operating system 
rather than the password itself. Thus, the actual password is not retrievable by a 
hacker who gains access to the password file. In simple terms, when a user enters a 
password, the hash of that password is compared to the stored hash value for veri-
fication. This approach to password protection is used by most operating systems.
Hash functions can be used for intrusion detection and virus detection. Store 
H(F) for each file on a system and secure the hash values (e.g., on a CD-R that is 
Figure 11.4 Simplified Examples of Digital Signatures
M
H
| |
E
E
K
D
K
M
D
H
Compare
(b)
E(PRa, H(M ))
E(K, [M || E(PRa, H(M ))]) 
Destination B
Source A
PRa
PRa
PUa
PUa
M
H
| |
(a)
M
E
D
H
Compare
E(PRa, H(M ))

346  CHAPTER 11 / CRYPTOGRAPHIC HASH FUNCTIONS
kept secure). One can later determine if a file has been modified by recomputing 
H(F). An intruder would need to change F without changing H(F).
A cryptographic hash function can be used to construct a pseudorandom 
 function (PRF) or a pseudorandom number generator (PRNG). A common 
 application for a hash-based PRF is for the generation of symmetric keys. We  discuss 
this  application in Chapter 12.
 11.2 TWO SIMPLE HASH FUNCTIONS
To get some feel for the security considerations involved in cryptographic hash 
functions, we present two simple, insecure hash functions in this section. All hash 
functions operate using the following general principles. The input (message, file, 
etc.) is viewed as a sequence of n -bit blocks. The input is processed one block at a 
time in an iterative fashion to produce an n-bit hash function.
One of the simplest hash functions is the bit-by-bit exclusive-OR (XOR) of 
every block. This can be expressed as
 
Ci = bi1 ⊕bi2 ⊕g ⊕bim 
where
Ci = ith bit of the hash code, 1 … i … n
m = number of n@bit blocks in the input
bij = ith bit in jth block
⊕= XOR operation
This operation produces a simple parity bit for each bit position and is known 
as a longitudinal redundancy check. It is reasonably effective for random data as a 
data integrity check. Each n-bit hash value is equally likely. Thus, the probability 
that a data error will result in an unchanged hash value is 2-n. With more predict-
ably formatted data, the function is less effective. For example, in most normal text 
files, the high-order bit of each octet is always zero. So if a 128-bit hash value is 
used, instead of an effectiveness of 2-128, the hash function on this type of data has 
an effectiveness of 2-112.
A simple way to improve matters is to perform a one-bit circular shift, or 
 rotation, on the hash value after each block is processed. The procedure can be 
summarized as follows.
1. Initially set the n-bit hash value to zero.
2. Process each successive n-bit block of data as follows:
a. Rotate the current hash value to the left by one bit.
b. XOR the block into the hash value.
This has the effect of “randomizing” the input more completely and overcoming 
any regularities that appear in the input. Figure 11.5 illustrates these two types of 
hash functions for 16-bit hash values.

11.2 / TWO SIMPLE HASH FUNCTIONS 347
Although the second procedure provides a good measure of data integrity, it is 
virtually useless for data security when an encrypted hash code is used with a plain-
text message, as in Figures 11.3b and 11.4a. Given a message, it is an easy  matter 
to produce a new message that yields that hash code: Simply prepare the  desired 
alternate message and then append an n-bit block that forces the new  message plus 
block to yield the desired hash code.
Although a simple XOR or rotated XOR (RXOR) is insufficient if only the 
hash code is encrypted, you may still feel that such a simple function could be 
 useful when the message together with the hash code is encrypted (Figure 11.3a). 
But you must be careful. A technique originally proposed by the National 
Bureau of Standards used the simple XOR applied to 64-bit blocks of the mes-
sage and then an encryption of the entire message that used the cipher block 
chaining (CBC) mode. We can define the scheme as follows: Given a message M 
consisting of a sequence of 64-bit blocks X1, X2, c , XN, define the hash code 
Figure 11.5 Two Simple Hash Functions
XOR of every 16-bit block
XOR with 1-bit r otation to the right
16 bits

348  CHAPTER 11 / CRYPTOGRAPHIC HASH FUNCTIONS
h = H(M) as the block-by-block XOR of all blocks and append the hash code as 
the final block:
 
h = XN+1 = X1 ⊕X2 ⊕c ⊕XN 
Next, encrypt the entire message plus hash code using CBC mode to produce the 
encrypted message Y1, Y2, c , YN+1. [JUEN85] points out several ways in which 
the ciphertext of this message can be manipulated in such a way that it is not detect-
able by the hash code. For example, by the definition of CBC (Figure 6.4), we have
 X1 = IV ⊕D(K,Y1)
 Xi = Yi-1 ⊕D(K, Yi)
 XN+1 = YN ⊕D(K, YN+1)
But XN+1 is the hash code:
 XN+1 = X1 ⊕X2 ⊕c ⊕XN
 = [IV ⊕D(K, Y1)] ⊕[Y1 ⊕D(K, Y2)] ⊕c ⊕[YN-1 ⊕D(K, YN)] 
Because the terms in the preceding equation can be XORed in any order, it follows 
that the hash code would not change if the ciphertext blocks were permuted.
 11.3 REQUIREMENTS AND SECURITY
Before proceeding, we need to define two terms. For a hash value h = H(x), we 
say that x is the preimage of h. That is, x is a data block whose hash value, using the 
function H, is h. Because H is a many-to-one mapping, for any given hash value h, 
there will in general be multiple preimages. A collision occurs if we have x ≠y and 
H(x) = H(y). Because we are using hash functions for data integrity, collisions are 
clearly undesirable.
Let us consider how many preimages are there for a given hash value, which is 
a measure of the number of potential collisions for a given hash value. Suppose the 
length of the hash code is n bits, and the function H takes as input messages or data 
blocks of length b bits with b 7 n. Then, the total number of possible messages is 
2b and the total number of possible hash values is 2n. On average, each hash value 
corresponds to 2b-n preimages. If H tends to uniformly distribute hash values then, 
in fact, each hash value will have close to 2b-n preimages. If we now allow inputs 
of arbitrary length, not just a fixed length of some number of bits, then the number 
of preimages per hash value is arbitrarily large. However, the security risks in the 
use of a hash function are not as severe as they might appear from this analysis. 
To  understand better the security implications of cryptographic hash functions, we 
need precisely define their security requirements.
Security Requirements for Cryptographic Hash Functions
Table 11.1 lists the generally accepted requirements for a cryptographic hash func-
tion. The first three properties are requirements for the practical application of a 
hash function.

442  CHAPTER 14 / KEY MANAGEMENT AND DISTRIBUTION
The topics of cryptographic key management and cryptographic key distribution are 
complex, involving cryptographic, protocol, and management considerations. The pur-
pose of this chapter is to give the reader a feel for the issues involved and a broad sur-
vey of the various aspects of key management and distribution. For more information, 
the place to start is the three-volume NIST SP 800-57, followed by the recommended 
readings listed at the end of this chapter.
 14.1 SYMMETRIC KEY DISTRIBUTION USING 
SYMMETRIC ENCRYPTION
For symmetric encryption to work, the two parties to an exchange must share the 
same key, and that key must be protected from access by others. Furthermore, fre-
quent key changes are usually desirable to limit the amount of data compromised 
if an attacker learns the key. Therefore, the strength of any cryptographic system 
rests with the key distribution technique, a term that refers to the means of delivering 
a key to two parties who wish to exchange data without allowing others to see the 
key. For two parties A and B, key distribution can be achieved in a number of ways, 
as follows:
1. A can select a key and physically deliver it to B.
2. A third party can select the key and physically deliver it to A and B.
3. If A and B have previously and recently used a key, one party can transmit the 
new key to the other, encrypted using the old key.
4. If A and B each has an encrypted connection to a third party C, C can deliver 
a key on the encrypted links to A and B.
Options 1 and 2 call for manual delivery of a key. For link encryption, this 
is a reasonable requirement, because each link encryption device is going to be 
 exchanging data only with its partner on the other end of the link. However, for 
 end-to-end encryption over a network, manual delivery is awkward. In a distributed 
system, any given host or terminal may need to engage in exchanges with many other 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
 
◆
Discuss the concept of a key hierarchy.
 
◆
Understand the issues involved in using asymmetric encryption to distribute 
symmetric keys.
 
◆
Present an overview of approaches to public-key distribution and analyze 
the risks involved in various approaches.
 
◆
List and explain the elements in an X.509 certificate.
 
◆
Present an overview of public-key infrastructure concepts.

14.1 / SYMMETRIC KEY DISTRIBUTION USING SYMMETRIC ENCRYPTION 443
hosts and terminals over time. Thus, each device needs a number of keys supplied 
dynamically. The problem is especially difficult in a wide-area distributed system.
The scale of the problem depends on the number of communicating pairs that 
must be supported. If end-to-end encryption is done at a network or IP level, then a 
key is needed for each pair of hosts on the network that wish to communicate. Thus, 
if there are N hosts, the number of required keys is [N(N - 1)]/2. If encryption is 
done at the application level, then a key is needed for every pair of users or pro-
cesses that require communication. Thus, a network may have hundreds of hosts 
but thousands of users and processes. Figure 14.1 illustrates the magnitude of the 
key distribution task for end-to-end encryption.1 A network using node-level 
 encryption with 1000 nodes would conceivably need to distribute as many as half a 
million keys. If that same network supported 10,000 applications, then as many as 
50 million keys may be required for application-level encryption.
Returning to our list, option 3 is a possibility for either link encryption or 
 end-to-end encryption, but if an attacker ever succeeds in gaining access to one key, 
then all subsequent keys will be revealed. Furthermore, the initial distribution of 
potentially millions of keys still must be made.
1Note that this figure uses a log-log scale, so that a linear graph indicates exponential growth. A basic 
review of log scales is in the math refresher document at the Computer Science Student Resource Site at 
WilliamStallings.com/StudentSupport.html.
Figure 14.1  Number of Keys Required to Support Arbitrary Connections between 
Endpoints
109
108
107
106
103
104
105
Number of keys
5
6
7
8 9
2
3
4
5
6
7
8 9
2
3
4
5
6
7
8 9
Number of endpoints

444  CHAPTER 14 / KEY MANAGEMENT AND DISTRIBUTION
For end-to-end encryption, some variation on option 4 has been widely 
 adopted. In this scheme, a key distribution center is responsible for distributing 
keys to pairs of users (hosts, processes, applications) as needed. Each user must 
share a unique key with the key distribution center for purposes of key distribution.
The use of a key distribution center is based on the use of a hierarchy of keys. 
At a minimum, two levels of keys are used (Figure 14.2). Communication between 
end systems is encrypted using a temporary key, often referred to as a session key. 
Typically, the session key is used for the duration of a logical connection, such as a 
frame relay connection or transport connection, and then discarded. Each session 
key is obtained from the key distribution center over the same networking facili-
ties used for end-user communication. Accordingly, session keys are transmitted in 
encrypted form, using a master key that is shared by the key distribution center and 
an end system or user.
For each end system or user, there is a unique master key that it shares with 
the key distribution center. Of course, these master keys must be securely distrib-
uted in some fashion. However, the scale of the problem is vastly reduced. If there 
are N entities that wish to communicate in pairs, then, as was mentioned, as many 
as [N(N - 1)]/2 session keys are needed at any one time. However, only N master 
keys are required, one for each entity. Thus, master keys can be distributed in some 
non-cryptographic way, such as physical delivery.
A Key Distribution Scenario
The key distribution concept can be deployed in a number of ways. A  typical 
 scenario is illustrated in Figure 14.3, which is based on a figure in [POPE79]. The sce-
nario assumes that each user shares a unique master key with the key  distribution 
center (KDC).
Let us assume that user A wishes to establish a logical connection with B and 
requires a one-time session key to protect the data transmitted over the connection. 
Figure 14.2 The Use of a Key Hierarchy
Data
Cryptographic
protection
Session keys
Cryptographic
protection
Master keys
Non-cryptographic
protection

14.1 / SYMMETRIC KEY DISTRIBUTION USING SYMMETRIC ENCRYPTION 445
A has a master key, Ka, known only to itself and the KDC; similarly, B shares the 
master key Kb with the KDC. The following steps occur.
1. A issues a request to the KDC for a session key to protect a logical connection 
to B. The message includes the identity of A and B and a unique identifier, N1, 
for this transaction, which we refer to as a nonce. The nonce may be a timestamp, 
a counter, or a random number; the minimum requirement is that it differs with 
each request. Also, to prevent masquerade, it should be difficult for an opponent 
to guess the nonce. Thus, a random number is a good choice for a nonce.
2. The KDC responds with a message encrypted using Ka. Thus, A is the only one 
who can successfully read the message, and A knows that it originated at the 
KDC. The message includes two items intended for A:
 
■The one-time session key, Ks, to be used for the session
 
■The original request message, including the nonce, to enable A to match 
this response with the appropriate request
Thus, A can verify that its original request was not altered before reception by 
the KDC and, because of the nonce, that this is not a replay of some previous 
request.
In addition, the message includes two items intended for B:
 
■The one-time session key, Ks, to be used for the session
 
■An identifier of A (e.g., its network address), IDA
These last two items are encrypted with Kb (the master key that the KDC 
shares with B). They are to be sent to B to establish the connection and prove 
A’s identity.
Figure 14.3 Key Distribution Scenario
Key Distribution
Center (KDC)
Key
distribution
steps
Authentication
steps
Initiator A
Responder B
(1) IDA || IDB || N1
(2) E(Ka, [Ks || IDA || IDB || N1])
|| E(Kb, [Ks || IDA])
(3) E(Kb, [Ks || IDA])
(4) E(Ks, N2)
(5) E(Ks, f(N2))

446  CHAPTER 14 / KEY MANAGEMENT AND DISTRIBUTION
3. A stores the session key for use in the upcoming session and forwards to B 
the  information that originated at the KDC for B, namely, E(Kb,[Ks }IDA]). 
Because this information is encrypted with Kb, it is protected from eavesdrop-
ping. B now knows the session key (Ks), knows that the other party is A (from 
IDA), and knows that the information originated at the KDC  (because it is 
encrypted using Kb).
At this point, a session key has been securely delivered to A and B, and they 
may begin their protected exchange. However, two additional steps are desirable:
4. Using the newly minted session key for encryption, B sends a nonce, N2, to A.
5. Also, using Ks, A responds with f(N2), where f is a function that performs some 
transformation on N2 (e.g., adding one).
These steps assure B that the original message it received (step 3) was not a replay.
Note that the actual key distribution involves only steps 1 through 3, but that 
steps 4 and 5, as well as step 3, perform an authentication function.
Hierarchical Key Control
It is not necessary to limit the key distribution function to a single KDC. Indeed, for 
very large networks, it may not be practical to do so. As an alternative, a hierarchy 
of KDCs can be established. For example, there can be local KDCs, each respon-
sible for a small domain of the overall internetwork, such as a single LAN or a single 
building. For communication among entities within the same local domain, the local 
KDC is responsible for key distribution. If two entities in different domains desire a 
shared key, then the corresponding local KDCs can communicate through a global 
KDC. In this case, any one of the three KDCs involved can actually select the key. 
The hierarchical concept can be extended to three or even more layers, depending 
on the size of the user population and the geographic scope of the internetwork.
A hierarchical scheme minimizes the effort involved in master key distri-
bution, because most master keys are those shared by a local KDC with its local 
 entities. Furthermore, such a scheme limits the damage of a faulty or subverted 
KDC to its local area only.
Session Key Lifetime
The more frequently session keys are exchanged, the more secure they are, because 
the opponent has less ciphertext to work with for any given session key. On the 
other hand, the distribution of session keys delays the start of any exchange and 
places a burden on network capacity. A security manager must try to balance these 
competing considerations in determining the lifetime of a particular session key.
For connection-oriented protocols, one obvious choice is to use the same ses-
sion key for the length of time that the connection is open, using a new session key 
for each new session. If a logical connection has a very long lifetime, then it would 
be prudent to change the session key periodically, perhaps every time the PDU 
(protocol data unit) sequence number cycles.
For a connectionless protocol, such as a transaction-oriented protocol, there 
is no explicit connection initiation or termination. Thus, it is not obvious how often 
one needs to change the session key. The most secure approach is to use a new 

14.1 / SYMMETRIC KEY DISTRIBUTION USING SYMMETRIC ENCRYPTION 447
session key for each exchange. However, this negates one of the principal benefits 
of connectionless protocols, which is minimum overhead and delay for each transac-
tion. A better strategy is to use a given session key for a certain fixed period only or 
for a certain number of transactions.
A Transparent Key Control Scheme
The approach suggested in Figure 14.3 has many variations, one of which is 
 described in this subsection. The scheme (Figure 14.4) is useful for providing 
 end-to-end  encryption at a network or transport level in a way that is transpar-
ent to the end users. The approach assumes that communication makes use of a 
connection- oriented end-to-end protocol, such as TCP. The noteworthy element of 
this  approach is a session security module (SSM), which may consist of functionality 
Figure 14.4 Automatic Key Distribution for Connection-Oriented Protocol
Key
distribution
center
Network
1. Host sends packet requesting connection.
2. Security service buffers packet; asks
    KDC for session key.
3. KDC distributes session key to both hosts.
4. Buffered packet transmitted.
HOST
Application 
Security
service
HOST
Application 
Security
service
2
3
4
1

448  CHAPTER 14 / KEY MANAGEMENT AND DISTRIBUTION
at one protocol layer, that performs end-to-end encryption and obtains session keys 
on behalf of its host or terminal.
The steps involved in establishing a connection are shown in Figure 14.4. When 
one host wishes to set up a connection to another host, it transmits a connection- 
request packet (step 1). The SSM saves that packet and applies to the KDC for 
 permission to establish the connection (step 2). The communication between the 
SSM and the KDC is encrypted using a master key shared only by this SSM and 
the KDC. If the KDC approves the connection request, it generates the session 
key and delivers it to the two appropriate SSMs, using a unique permanent key for 
each SSM (step 3). The requesting SSM can now release the connection request 
packet, and a connection is set up between the two end systems (step 4). All user 
data  exchanged between the two end systems are encrypted by their respective SSMs 
using the  one-time session key.
The automated key distribution approach provides the flexibility and dynamic 
characteristics needed to allow a number of terminal users to access a number of 
hosts and for the hosts to exchange data with each other.
Decentralized Key Control
The use of a key distribution center imposes the requirement that the KDC be 
trusted and be protected from subversion. This requirement can be avoided if key 
distribution is fully decentralized. Although full decentralization is not practical for 
larger networks using symmetric encryption only, it may be useful within a local 
context.
A decentralized approach requires that each end system be able to commu-
nicate in a secure manner with all potential partner end systems for purposes of 
session key distribution. Thus, there may need to be as many as [n(n - 1)]/2 master 
keys for a configuration with n end systems.
A session key may be established with the following sequence of steps 
(Figure 14.5).
1. A issues a request to B for a session key and includes a nonce, N1.
2. B responds with a message that is encrypted using the shared master key. The 
response includes the session key selected by B, an identifier of B, the value 
f(N1), and another nonce, N2.
3. Using the new session key, A returns f(N2) to B.
Figure 14.5 Decentralized Key Distribution
(1) IDA || N1
(2) E(Km, [Ks || IDA  || IDB || f(N1) || N2 ])
Initiator
A
Responder
B
(3) E(Ks, f(N2))

14.1 / SYMMETRIC KEY DISTRIBUTION USING SYMMETRIC ENCRYPTION 449
Thus, although each node must maintain at most (n - 1) master keys, as many 
session keys as required may be generated and used. Because the messages trans-
ferred using the master key are short, cryptanalysis is difficult. As before, session 
keys are used for only a limited time to protect them.
Controlling Key Usage
The concept of a key hierarchy and the use of automated key distribution techniques 
greatly reduce the number of keys that must be manually managed and  distributed. 
It also may be desirable to impose some control on the way in which automatically 
distributed keys are used. For example, in addition to separating master keys from 
session keys, we may wish to define different types of session keys on the basis of 
use, such as
 
■Data-encrypting key, for general communication across a network
 
■PIN-encrypting key, for personal identification numbers (PINs) used in 
 electronic funds transfer and point-of-sale applications
 
■File-encrypting key, for encrypting files stored in publicly accessible locations
To illustrate the value of separating keys by type, consider the risk that a  master 
key is imported as a data-encrypting key into a device. Normally, the master key is 
physically secured within the cryptographic hardware of the key distribution center 
and of the end systems. Session keys encrypted with this master key are available to 
application programs, as are the data encrypted with such session keys. However, 
if a master key is treated as a session key, it may be possible for an unauthorized 
 application to obtain plaintext of session keys encrypted with that master key.
Thus, it may be desirable to institute controls in systems that limit the ways 
in which keys are used, based on characteristics associated with those keys. One 
simple plan is to associate a tag with each key ([JONE82]; see also [DAVI89]). 
The proposed technique is for use with DES and makes use of the extra 8 bits in 
each  64-bit DES key. That is, the eight non-key bits ordinarily reserved for parity 
 checking form the key tag. The bits have the following interpretation:
 
■One bit indicates whether the key is a session key or a master key
 
■One bit indicates whether the key can be used for encryption
 
■One bit indicates whether the key can be used for decryption
 
■The remaining bits are spares for future use.
Because the tag is embedded in the key, it is encrypted along with the key when that 
key is distributed, thus providing protection. The drawbacks of this scheme are
1. The tag length is limited to 8 bits, limiting its flexibility and functionality.
2. Because the tag is not transmitted in clear form, it can be used only at the 
point of decryption, limiting the ways in which key use can be controlled.
A more flexible scheme, referred to as the control vector, is described in 
[MATY91a and b]. In this scheme, each session key has an associated control vector 
consisting of a number of fields that specify the uses and restrictions for that session 
key. The length of the control vector may vary.

450  CHAPTER 14 / KEY MANAGEMENT AND DISTRIBUTION
The control vector is cryptographically coupled with the key at the time of 
key generation at the KDC. The coupling and decoupling processes are illustrated 
in Figure 14.6. As a first step, the control vector is passed through a hash func-
tion that produces a value whose length is equal to the encryption key length. Hash 
functions are discussed in detail in Chapter 11. In essence, a hash function maps 
values from a larger range into a smaller range with a reasonably uniform spread. 
Thus, for  example, if numbers in the range 1 to 100 are hashed into numbers in the 
range 1 to 10, approximately 10% of the source values should map into each of the 
target values.
The hash value is then XORed with the master key to produce an output that 
is used as the key input for encrypting the session key. Thus,
 Hash value = H = h(CV)
 Key input = Km ⊕H
 Ciphertext = E([Km ⊕H], Ks)
where Km is the master key and Ks is the session key. The session key is recovered 
in plaintext by the reverse operation:
 
D([Km ⊕H], E([Km ⊕H], Ks)) 
When a session key is delivered to a user from the KDC, it is accompanied 
by the control vector in clear form. The session key can be recovered only by using 
both the master key that the user shares with the KDC and the control vector. Thus, 
the linkage between the session key and its control vector is maintained.
Figure 14.6 Control Vector Encryption and Decryption
Control
vector
Master
key
Session
key
Hashing
function
Key
input
Key
input
Ciphertext
input
Plaintext
input
Encryption
function
Encrypted
session key
(a) Control vector encryption
Control
vector
Master
key
Encrypted
session key
Hashing
function
Decryption
function
Session key
(b) Control vector decryption

14.2 / SYMMETRIC KEY DISTRIBUTION USING ASYMMETRIC ENCRYPTION 451
Use of the control vector has two advantages over use of an 8-bit tag. First, 
there is no restriction on length of the control vector, which enables arbitrarily com-
plex controls to be imposed on key use. Second, the control vector is available in 
clear form at all stages of operation. Thus, control of key use can be exercised in 
multiple locations.
 14.2 SYMMETRIC KEY DISTRIBUTION USING 
ASYMMETRIC ENCRYPTION
Because of the inefficiency of public-key cryptosystems, they are almost never used 
for the direct encryption of sizable blocks of data, but are limited to relatively small 
blocks. One of the most important uses of a public-key cryptosystem is to encrypt 
secret keys for distribution. We see many specific examples of this in Part Five. 
Here, we discuss general principles and typical approaches.
Simple Secret Key Distribution
An extremely simple scheme was put forward by Merkle [MERK79], as illustrated 
in Figure 14.7. If A wishes to communicate with B, the following procedure is 
employed:
1. A generates a public/private key pair {PUa, PRa} and transmits a message to B 
consisting of PUa and an identifier of A, IDA.
2. B generates a secret key, Ks, and transmits it to A, which is encrypted with A’s 
public key.
3. A computes D(PRa, E(PUa, Ks)) to recover the secret key. Because only A can 
decrypt the message, only A and B will know the identity of Ks.
4. A discards PUa and PRa and B discards PUa.
A and B can now securely communicate using conventional encryption and 
the session key Ks. At the completion of the exchange, both A and B discard Ks. 
Despite its simplicity, this is an attractive protocol. No keys exist before the start of 
the communication and none exist after the completion of communication. Thus, 
the risk of compromise of the keys is minimal. At the same time, the communication 
is secure from eavesdropping.
The protocol depicted in Figure 14.7 is insecure against an adversary who can 
 intercept messages and then either relay the intercepted message or substitute  another 
message (see Figure 1.3c). Such an attack is known as a man-in-the-middle attack 
[RIVE84]. We saw this type of attack in Chapter 10 (Figure 10.2). In the present 
Figure 14.7 Simple Use of Public-Key Encryption to Establish a Session Key
B
A
(1) PUa || IDA
(2) E(PUa, Ks)

452  CHAPTER 14 / KEY MANAGEMENT AND DISTRIBUTION
case, if an adversary, D, has control of the intervening communication channel, 
then D can compromise the communication in the following fashion without being 
 detected (Figure 14.8).
1. A generates a public/private key pair {PUa, PRa} and transmits a message 
 intended for B consisting of PUa and an identifier of A, IDA.
2. D intercepts the message, creates its own public/private key pair {PUd, PRd} 
and transmits PUd }IDA to B.
3. B generates a secret key, Ks, and transmits E(PUd, Ks).
4. D intercepts the message and learns Ks by computing D(PRd, E(PUd, Ks)).
5. D transmits E(PUa, Ks) to A.
Figure 14.8 Another Man-in-the-Middle Attack
Alice
Darth
Bob
Private key PRa
Public key PUa
Private key PRb
Public key PUb
Secret key Ks 
Ks =
D(PRd, E(PUd, Ks))  
Private key PRd
Public key PUd
PUa, IDA
PUd, IDA
E(PUd, Ks)
Alice, Bob, and
Darth share K1
  
E(PUa, Ks)

14.2 / SYMMETRIC KEY DISTRIBUTION USING ASYMMETRIC ENCRYPTION 453
The result is that both A and B know Ks and are unaware that Ks has also been 
revealed to D. A and B can now exchange messages using Ks. D no longer  actively 
interferes with the communications channel but simply eavesdrops. Knowing Ks, 
D can decrypt all messages, and both A and B are unaware of the problem. Thus, 
this simple protocol is only useful in an environment where the only threat is 
eavesdropping.
Secret Key Distribution with Confidentiality 
and Authentication
Figure 14.9, based on an approach suggested in [NEED78], provides protection 
against both active and passive attacks. We begin at a point when it is assumed that 
A and B have exchanged public keys by one of the schemes described subsequently 
in this chapter. Then the following steps occur.
1. A uses B’s public key to encrypt a message to B containing an identifier of 
A(IDA) and a nonce (N1), which is used to identify this transaction uniquely.
2. B sends a message to A encrypted with PUa and containing A’s nonce (N1) 
as well as a new nonce generated by B (N2). Because only B could have 
 decrypted message (1), the presence of N1 in message (2) assures A that the 
correspondent is B.
3. A returns N2, encrypted using B’s public key, to assure B that its correspon-
dent is A.
4. A selects a secret key Ks and sends M = E(PUb, E(PRa, Ks)) to B. Encryption 
of this message with B’s public key ensures that only B can read it; encryption 
with A’s private key ensures that only A could have sent it.
5. B computes D(PUa, D(PRb, M)) to recover the secret key.
The result is that this scheme ensures both confidentiality and authentication 
in the exchange of a secret key.
Figure 14.9 Public-Key Distribution of Secret Keys
Initiator
A
Responder
B
(1) E(PUb, [N1 || IDA])
(4) E(PUb, E(PRa, Ks))
(3) E(PUb, N2)
(2) E(PUa, [N1 || N2])

454  CHAPTER 14 / KEY MANAGEMENT AND DISTRIBUTION
A Hybrid Scheme
Yet another way to use public-key encryption to distribute secret keys is a hybrid 
approach in use on IBM mainframes [LE93]. This scheme retains the use of a key 
distribution center (KDC) that shares a secret master key with each user and dis-
tributes secret session keys encrypted with the master key. A public-key scheme is 
used to distribute the master keys. The following rationale is provided for using this 
three-level approach:
 
■Performance: There are many applications, especially transaction-oriented 
 applications, in which the session keys change frequently. Distribution of ses-
sion keys by public-key encryption could degrade overall system performance 
because of the relatively high computational load of public-key encryption 
and decryption. With a three-level hierarchy, public-key encryption is used 
only occasionally to update the master key between a user and the KDC.
 
■Backward compatibility: The hybrid scheme is easily overlaid on an existing 
KDC scheme with minimal disruption or software changes.
The addition of a public-key layer provides a secure, efficient means of dis-
tributing master keys. This is an advantage in a configuration in which a single KDC 
serves a widely distributed set of users.
 14.3 DISTRIBUTION OF PUBLIC KEYS
Several techniques have been proposed for the distribution of public keys. Virtually 
all these proposals can be grouped into the following general schemes:
 
■Public announcement
 
■Publicly available directory
 
■Public-key authority
 
■Public-key certificates
Public Announcement of Public Keys
On the face of it, the point of public-key encryption is that the public key is public. 
Thus, if there is some broadly accepted public-key algorithm, such as RSA, any 
participant can send his or her public key to any other participant or broadcast the 
key to the community at large (Figure 14.10). For example, because of the growing 
popularity of PGP (pretty good privacy, discussed in Chapter 19), which makes use 
of RSA, many PGP users have adopted the practice of appending their public key 
to messages that they send to public forums, such as USENET newsgroups and 
Internet mailing lists.
Although this approach is convenient, it has a major weakness. Anyone can 
forge such a public announcement. That is, some user could pretend to be user A 
and send a public key to another participant or broadcast such a public key. Until 
such time as user A discovers the forgery and alerts other participants, the forger is 
able to read all encrypted messages intended for A and can use the forged keys for 
authentication (see Figure 9.3).

14.3 / DISTRIBUTION OF PUBLIC KEYS 455
Publicly Available Directory
A greater degree of security can be achieved by maintaining a publicly available 
 dynamic directory of public keys. Maintenance and distribution of the public 
 directory would have to be the responsibility of some trusted entity or organization 
(Figure 14.11). Such a scheme would include the following elements:
1. The authority maintains a directory with a {name, public key} entry for each 
participant.
2. Each participant registers a public key with the directory authority. 
Registration would have to be in person or by some form of secure authenti-
cated communication.
3. A participant may replace the existing key with a new one at any time, either 
because of the desire to replace a public key that has already been used for 
a large amount of data, or because the corresponding private key has been 
 compromised in some way.
4. Participants could also access the directory electronically. For this purpose, 
secure, authenticated communication from the authority to the participant is 
mandatory.
Figure 14.10 Uncontrolled Public-Key Distribution
PUa
PUa
PUa
PUa
PUb
PUb
PUb
PUb
B
A
Figure 14.11 Public-Key Publication
Public-key
directory
PUa
PUb
A
B

456  CHAPTER 14 / KEY MANAGEMENT AND DISTRIBUTION
This scheme is clearly more secure than individual public announcements 
but still has vulnerabilities. If an adversary succeeds in obtaining or computing the 
private key of the directory authority, the adversary could authoritatively pass out 
counterfeit public keys and subsequently impersonate any participant and eaves-
drop on messages sent to any participant. Another way to achieve the same end is 
for the adversary to tamper with the records kept by the authority.
Public-Key Authority
Stronger security for public-key distribution can be achieved by providing tighter 
control over the distribution of public keys from the directory. A typical scenario is 
illustrated in Figure 14.12, which is based on a figure in [POPE79]. As before, the 
scenario assumes that a central authority maintains a dynamic directory of public 
keys of all participants. In addition, each participant reliably knows a public key for 
the authority, with only the authority knowing the corresponding private key. The 
following steps (matched by number to Figure 14.12) occur.
1. A sends a timestamped message to the public-key authority containing a 
 request for the current public key of B.
2. The authority responds with a message that is encrypted using the authority’s 
private key, PRauth. Thus, A is able to decrypt the message using the author-
ity’s public key. Therefore, A is assured that the message originated with the 
authority. The message includes the following:
 
■B’s public key, PUb, which A can use to encrypt messages destined for B
 
■The original request used to enable A to match this response with the cor-
responding earlier request and to verify that the original request was not 
altered before reception by the authority
 
■The original timestamp given so A can determine that this is not an old mes-
sage from the authority containing a key other than B’s current public key
3. A stores B’s public key and also uses it to encrypt a message to B containing 
an identifier of A (IDA) and a nonce (N1), which is used to identify this trans-
action uniquely.
 
4, 5. B retrieves A’s public key from the authority in the same manner as A  retrieved 
B’s public key.
At this point, public keys have been securely delivered to A and B, and they 
may begin their protected exchange. However, two additional steps are desirable:
6. B sends a message to A encrypted with PUa and containing A’s nonce (N1) 
as well as a new nonce generated by B (N2). Because only B could have 
 decrypted message (3), the presence of N1 in message (6) assures A that the 
correspondent is B.
7. A returns N2, which is encrypted using B’s public key, to assure B that its 
 correspondent is A.
Thus, a total of seven messages are required. However, the initial five 
 messages need be used only infrequently because both A and B can save the other’s 
public key for future use—a technique known as caching. Periodically, a user should 
 request fresh copies of the public keys of its correspondents to ensure currency.

14.3 / DISTRIBUTION OF PUBLIC KEYS 457
Public-Key Certificates
The scenario of Figure 14.12 is attractive, yet it has some drawbacks. The  public-key 
authority could be somewhat of a bottleneck in the system, for a user must  appeal 
to the authority for a public key for every other user that it wishes to contact. 
As  before, the directory of names and public keys maintained by the authority is 
vulnerable to tampering.
An alternative approach, first suggested by Kohnfelder [KOHN78], is to use 
certificates that can be used by participants to exchange keys without contacting a 
public-key authority, in a way that is as reliable as if the keys were obtained directly 
from a public-key authority. In essence, a certificate consists of a public key, an 
identifier of the key owner, and the whole block signed by a trusted third party. 
Typically, the third party is a certificate authority, such as a government agency or 
a financial institution, that is trusted by the user community. A user can present 
his or her public key to the authority in a secure manner and obtain a certificate. 
The user can then publish the certificate. Anyone needing this user’s public key can 
obtain the certificate and verify that it is valid by way of the attached trusted signa-
ture. A participant can also convey its key information to another by transmitting 
its certificate. Other participants can verify that the certificate was created by the 
authority. We can place the following requirements on this scheme:
1. Any participant can read a certificate to determine the name and public key of 
the certificate’s owner.
2. Any participant can verify that the certificate originated from the certificate 
authority and is not counterfeit.
3. Only the certificate authority can create and update certificates.
Figure 14.12 Public-Key Distribution Scenario
Public-key
authority
Initiator A
Responder B
(1)  Request || T1
(2) E(PRauth, [PUb || Request || T1])
(3) E(PUb, [ IDA || N1])
(4)  Request || T2
(5) E(PRauth, [PUa || Request || T2])
(6) E(PUa, [ N1 || N2])
(7) E(PUb, N2)

458  CHAPTER 14 / KEY MANAGEMENT AND DISTRIBUTION
These requirements are satisfied by the original proposal in [KOHN78]. Denning 
[DENN83] added the following additional requirement:
4. Any participant can verify the time validity of the certificate.
A certificate scheme is illustrated in Figure 14.13. Each participant applies 
to the certificate authority, supplying a public key and requesting a certificate. 
Application must be in person or by some form of secure authenticated communi-
cation. For participant A, the authority provides a certificate of the form
 
CA = E(PRauth, [T}IDA}PUa]) 
where PRauth is the private key used by the authority and T is a timestamp. A may 
then pass this certificate on to any other participant, who reads and verifies the 
 certificate as follows:
 
D(PUauth, CA) = D(PUauth, E(PRauth, [T}IDA}PUa])) = (T}IDA}PUa) 
The recipient uses the authority’s public key, PUauth, to decrypt the certifi-
cate. Because the certificate is readable only using the authority’s public key, this 
verifies that the certificate came from the certificate authority. The elements IDA 
and PUa provide the recipient with the name and public key of the certificate’s 
holder. The timestamp T validates the currency of the certificate. The timestamp 
Figure 14.13 Exchange of Public-Key Certificates
(a) Obtaining certificates from CA
(b) Exchanging certificates
PUa
PUb
A
B
Certificate
Authority
CA = E(PRauth, [T1 || IDA || PUa])
CB = E(PRauth, [T2 || IDB || PUb])
(1) CA
(2) CB
A
B

14.4 / X.509 CERTIFICATES 459
counters the following scenario. A’s private key is learned by an adversary. 
A  generates a new private/public key pair and applies to the certificate authority 
for a new  certificate. Meanwhile, the adversary replays the old certificate to B. If B 
then  encrypts  messages using the compromised old public key, the adversary can 
read those messages.
In this context, the compromise of a private key is comparable to the loss of a 
credit card. The owner cancels the credit card number but is at risk until all possible 
communicants are aware that the old credit card is obsolete. Thus, the timestamp 
serves as something like an expiration date. If a certificate is sufficiently old, it is 
assumed to be expired.
One scheme has become universally accepted for formatting public-key 
 certificates: the X.509 standard. X.509 certificates are used in most network security 
applications, including IP security, transport layer security (TLS), and S/MIME, all 
of which are discussed in Part Five. X.509 is examined in detail in the next section.
 14.4 X.509 CERTIFICATES
ITU-T recommendation X.509 is part of the X.500 series of recommendations that 
define a directory service. The directory is, in effect, a server or distributed set 
of servers that maintains a database of information about users. The information 
 includes a mapping from user name to network address, as well as other attributes 
and information about the users.
X.509 defines a framework for the provision of authentication services by the 
X.500 directory to its users. The directory may serve as a repository of public-key 
certificates of the type discussed in Section 14.3. Each certificate contains the public 
key of a user and is signed with the private key of a trusted certification authority. 
In addition, X.509 defines alternative authentication protocols based on the use of 
public-key certificates.
X.509 is an important standard because the certificate structure and authenti-
cation protocols defined in X.509 are used in a variety of contexts. For example, the 
X.509 certificate format is used in S/MIME (Chapter 19), IP Security (Chapter 20), 
and SSL/TLS (Chapter 17).
X.509 was initially issued in 1988. The standard was subsequently revised 
in 1993 to address some of the security concerns documented in [IANS90] and 
[MITC90]. The standard is currently at version 7, issued in 2012.
X.509 is based on the use of public-key cryptography and digital signatures. 
The standard does not dictate the use of a specific digital signature algorithm nor a 
specific hash function. Figure 14.14 illustrates the overall X.509 scheme for genera-
tion of a public-key certificate. The certificate for Bob’s public key includes unique 
identifying information for Bob, Bob’s public key, and identifying information 
about the CA, plus other information as explained subsequently. This information 
is then signed by computing a hash value of the information and generating a digital 
signature using the hash value and the CA’s private key. X.509 indicates that the 
signature is formed by encrypting the hash value. This suggests the use of one of the 
RSA schemes discussed in Section 13.6. However, the current version of X.509 does 

460  CHAPTER 14 / KEY MANAGEMENT AND DISTRIBUTION
not dictate a specific digital signature algorithm. If the NIST DSA (Section 13.4) or 
the ECDSA (Section 13.5) scheme is used, then the hash value is not encrypted but 
serves as input to a digital signature generation algorithm.
Certificates
The heart of the X.509 scheme is the public-key certificate associated with each 
user. These user certificates are assumed to be created by some trusted certification 
authority (CA) and placed in the directory by the CA or by the user. The directory 
server itself is not responsible for the creation of public keys or for the certifica-
tion function; it merely provides an easily accessible location for users to obtain 
certificates.
Figure 14.15a shows the general format of a certificate, which includes the 
 following elements.
 
■Version: Differentiates among successive versions of the certificate format; the 
default is version 1. If the issuer unique identifier or subject unique identifier 
are present, the value must be version 2. If one or more extensions are present, 
the version must be version 3. Although the X.509 specification is currently at 
version 7, no changes have been made to the fields that make up the certificate 
since version 3.
 
■Serial number: An integer value unique within the issuing CA that is unam-
biguously associated with this certificate.
 
■Signature algorithm identifier: The algorithm used to sign the certificate 
 together with any associated parameters. Because this information is repeated 
in the signature field at the end of the certificate, this field has little, if any, utility.
Figure 14.14 X.509 Public-Key Certificate Use
Unsigned certificate:
contains user ID,
user's public key
Signed certificate
Recipient can verify
signature by comparing
hash code values
Generate hash
code of unsigned
certificate
Encrypt hash code
with CA's private key
to form signature
H
H
Bob's ID
information
CA
information
Bob's public key
E
D
Decrypt signature
with CA's public key
to recover hash code
Use certificate to
verify Bob's public key
Create signed
digital certificate

14.4 / X.509 CERTIFICATES 461
 
■Issuer name: X.500 name of the CA that created and signed this certificate.
 
■Period of validity: Consists of two dates: the first and last on which the certifi-
cate is valid.
 
■Subject name: The name of the user to whom this certificate refers. That is, this 
certificate certifies the public key of the subject who holds the corresponding 
private key.
 
■Subject’s public-key information: The public key of the subject, plus an identi-
fier of the algorithm for which this key is to be used, together with any associ-
ated parameters.
 
■Issuer unique identifier: An optional-bit string field used to identify uniquely 
the issuing CA in the event the X.500 name has been reused for different 
entities.
 
■Subject unique identifier: An optional-bit string field used to identify uniquely 
the subject in the event the X.500 name has been reused for different entities.
 
■Extensions: A set of one or more extension fields. Extensions were added in 
version 3 and are discussed later in this section.
 
■Signature: Covers all of the other fields of the certificate. One component of 
this field is the digital signature applied to the other fields of the certificate. 
This field includes the signature algorithm identifier.
The unique identifier fields were added in version 2 to handle the possible 
reuse of subject and/or issuer names over time. These fields are rarely used.
Figure 14.15 X.509 Formats
Certificate
serial number
Version
Issuer name
Signature
algorithm
identifier
Subject name
Extensions
Issuer unique
identifier
Subject unique
identifier
Algorithm
Parameters
Not before
Algorithms
Parameters
Key
Algorithms
Parameters
Signature of certificate
(a) X.509 certificate
Not after
Subject's
public key
info
Signature
Period of
validity
Version 1
Version 2
Version 3
All
versions
Issuer name
This update date
Next update date
•
•
•
Signature
algorithm
identifier
Algorithm
Parameters
User certificate serial #
(b) Certificate revocation list
Revocation date
Algorithms
Parameters
Signature of certificate
Signature
Revoked
certificate
User certificate serial #
Revocation date
Revoked
certificate

462  CHAPTER 14 / KEY MANAGEMENT AND DISTRIBUTION
The standard uses the following notation to define a certificate:
 
CA VAW
= CA {V, SN, AI, CA, UCA, A, UA, Ap, TA} 
where
Y V XW
= the certificate of user X issued by certification authority Y
Y {I} = the signing of I by Y. It consists of I with an encrypted hash 
code appended
V = version of the certificate
SN = serial number of the certificate
AI = identifier of the algorithm used to sign the certificate
CA = name of certificate authority
UCA = optional unique identifier of the CA
A = name of user A
UA = optional unique identifier of the user A
Ap = public key of user A
TA = period of validity of the certificate
The CA signs the certificate with its private key. If the corresponding public 
key is known to a user, then that user can verify that a certificate signed by the CA is 
valid. This is the typical digital signature approach illustrated in Figure 13.2.
OBTAINING A USER’S CERTIFICATE User certificates generated by a CA have the 
 following characteristics:
 
■Any user with access to the public key of the CA can verify the user public key 
that was certified.
 
■No party other than the certification authority can modify the certificate 
 without this being detected.
Because certificates are unforgeable, they can be placed in a directory without the 
need for the directory to make special efforts to protect them.
If all users subscribe to the same CA, then there is a common trust of that CA. 
All user certificates can be placed in the directory for access by all users. In addi-
tion, a user can transmit his or her certificate directly to other users. In either case, 
once B is in possession of A’s certificate, B has confidence that messages it encrypts 
with A’s public key will be secure from eavesdropping and that messages signed 
with A’s private key are unforgeable.
If there is a large community of users, it may not be practical for all users to 
subscribe to the same CA. Because it is the CA that signs certificates, each partici-
pating user must have a copy of the CA’s own public key to verify signatures. This 
public key must be provided to each user in an absolutely secure (with respect 
to integrity and authenticity) way so that the user has confidence in the associ-
ated certificates. Thus, with many users, it may be more practical for there to be 
a number of CAs, each of which securely provides its public key to some fraction 
of the users.

14.4 / X.509 CERTIFICATES 463
Now suppose that A has obtained a certificate from certification  authority 
X1 and B has obtained a certificate from CA X2. If A does not securely know the 
public key of X2, then B’s certificate, issued by X2, is useless to A. A can read B’s 
 certificate, but A cannot verify the signature. However, if the two CAs have  securely 
exchanged their own public keys, the following procedure will enable A to obtain 
B’s public key.
Step 1 A obtains from the directory the certificate of X2 signed by X1. Because 
A securely knows X1>s public key, A can obtain X2>s public key from its 
 certificate and verify it by means of X1>s signature on the certificate.
Step 2 A then goes back to the directory and obtains the certificate of B signed by 
X2. Because A now has a trusted copy of X2>s public key, A can verify the 
signature and securely obtain B’s public key.
A has used a chain of certificates to obtain B’s public key. In the notation of 
X.509, this chain is expressed as
 
X1 V X2 W X2 V B W 
In the same fashion, B can obtain A’s public key with the reverse chain:
 
X2 V X1 W X1 V A W 
This scheme need not be limited to a chain of two certificates. An arbitrarily 
long path of CAs can be followed to produce a chain. A chain with N elements 
would be expressed as
 
X1 V X2 W X2 V X3 W c XN V B W 
In this case, each pair of CAs in the chain (Xi, Xi+1) must have created certifi-
cates for each other.
All these certificates of CAs by CAs need to appear in the directory, and the 
user needs to know how they are linked to follow a path to another user’s public-key 
certificate. X.509 suggests that CAs be arranged in a hierarchy so that  navigation is 
straightforward.
Figure 14.16, taken from X.509, is an example of such a hierarchy. The con-
nected circles indicate the hierarchical relationship among the CAs; the associated 
boxes indicate certificates maintained in the directory for each CA entry. The direc-
tory entry for each CA includes two types of certificates:
 
■Forward certificates: Certificates of X generated by other CAs
 
■Reverse certificates: Certificates generated by X that are the certificates of 
other CAs
In this example, user A can acquire the following certificates from the direc-
tory to establish a certification path to B:
 
X V W W W V V W V V Y W Y V Z W Z V B W 
When A has obtained these certificates, it can unwrap the certification path in 
sequence to recover a trusted copy of B’s public key. Using this public key, A can 
send encrypted messages to B. If A wishes to receive encrypted messages back 

464  CHAPTER 14 / KEY MANAGEMENT AND DISTRIBUTION
from B, or to sign messages sent to B, then B will require A’s public key, which can 
be obtained from the following certification path:
 
Z V Y W Y V V W V V W W W V X W X V A W 
B can obtain this set of certificates from the directory, or A can provide them 
as part of its initial message to B.
REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATES Recall from Figure 14.15 that each certificate  includes 
a period of validity, much like a credit card. Typically, a new certificate is issued just 
before the expiration of the old one. In addition, it may be desirable on occasion to 
revoke a certificate before it expires, for one of the following reasons.
1. The user’s private key is assumed to be compromised.
2. The user is no longer certified by this CA. Reasons for this include that the 
subject’s name has changed, the certificate is superseded, or the certificate was 
not issued in conformance with the CA’s policies.
3. The CA’s certificate is assumed to be compromised.
Each CA must maintain a list consisting of all revoked but not expired 
 certificates issued by that CA, including both those issued to users and to other 
CAs. These lists should also be posted on the directory.
Figure 14.16 X.509 Hierarchy: A Hypothetical Example
U
V
W
Y
Z
B
X
C
A
U<<V>>
V<<U>>
V<<W>>
W<<V>>
V<<Y>>
Y<<V>>
W<<X>>
X<<W>>
X<<Z>>
Y<<Z>>
Z<<Y>>
Z<<X>>
X<<C>>
X<<A>>
Z<<B>>

14.4 / X.509 CERTIFICATES 465
Each certificate revocation list (CRL) posted to the directory is signed by the 
issuer and includes (Figure 14.15b) the issuer’s name, the date the list was created, 
the date the next CRL is scheduled to be issued, and an entry for each revoked 
certificate. Each entry consists of the serial number of a certificate and revocation 
date for that certificate. Because serial numbers are unique within a CA, the serial 
number is sufficient to identify the certificate.
When a user receives a certificate in a message, the user must determine 
whether the certificate has been revoked. The user could check the directory each 
time a certificate is received. To avoid the delays (and possible costs) associated 
with directory searches, it is likely that the user would maintain a local cache of 
 certificates and lists of revoked certificates.
X.509 Version 3
The X.509 version 2 format does not convey all of the information that recent  design 
and implementation experience has shown to be needed. [FORD95] lists the follow-
ing requirements not satisfied by version 2.
1. The subject field is inadequate to convey the identity of a key owner to a 
 public-key user. X.509 names may be relatively short and lacking in obvious 
identification details that may be needed by the user.
2. The subject field is also inadequate for many applications, which typically 
 recognize entities by an Internet email address, a URL, or some other Internet-
related identification.
3. There is a need to indicate security policy information. This enables a security 
application or function, such as IPSec, to relate an X.509 certificate to a given 
policy.
4. There is a need to limit the damage that can result from a faulty or malicious 
CA by setting constraints on the applicability of a particular certificate.
5. It is important to be able to identify different keys used by the same owner at 
different times. This feature supports key lifecycle management: in particular, 
the ability to update key pairs for users and CAs on a regular basis or under 
exceptional circumstances.
Rather than continue to add fields to a fixed format, standards developers 
felt that a more flexible approach was needed. Thus, version 3 includes a number 
of  optional extensions that may be added to the version 2 format. Each extension 
consists of an extension identifier, a criticality indicator, and an extension value. 
The criticality indicator indicates whether an extension can be safely ignored. If the 
indicator has a value of TRUE and an implementation does not recognize the 
 extension, it must treat the certificate as invalid.
The certificate extensions fall into three main categories: key and policy 
 information, subject and issuer attributes, and certification path constraints.
KEY AND POLICY INFORMATION These extensions convey additional information 
about the subject and issuer keys, plus indicators of certificate policy. A certif-
icate policy is a named set of rules that indicates the applicability of a certifi-
cate to a particular community and/or class of application with common security 
 requirements. For example, a policy might be applicable to the authentication of 

466  CHAPTER 14 / KEY MANAGEMENT AND DISTRIBUTION
electronic data interchange (EDI) transactions for the trading of goods within a 
given price range.
This area includes:
 
■Authority key identifier: Identifies the public key to be used to verify the 
 signature on this certificate or CRL. Enables distinct keys of the same CA to 
be differentiated. One use of this field is to handle CA key pair updating.
 
■Subject key identifier: Identifies the public key being certified. Useful for sub-
ject key pair updating. Also, a subject may have multiple key pairs and, cor-
respondingly, different certificates for different purposes (e.g., digital signature 
and encryption key agreement).
 
■Key usage: Indicates a restriction imposed as to the purposes for which, and 
the policies under which, the certified public key may be used. May indicate 
one or more of the following: digital signature, nonrepudiation, key encryp-
tion, data encryption, key agreement, CA signature verification on certificates, 
CA signature verification on CRLs.
 
■Private-key usage period: Indicates the period of use of the private key cor-
responding to the public key. Typically, the private key is used over a different 
period from the validity of the public key. For example, with digital signature 
keys, the usage period for the signing private key is typically shorter than that 
for the verifying public key.
 
■Certificate policies: Certificates may be used in environments where multiple 
policies apply. This extension lists policies that the certificate is recognized as 
supporting, together with optional qualifier information.
 
■Policy mappings: Used only in certificates for CAs issued by other CAs. Policy 
mappings allow an issuing CA to indicate that one or more of that issuer’s 
policies can be considered equivalent to another policy used in the subject 
CA’s domain.
CERTIFICATE SUBJECT AND ISSUER ATTRIBUTES These extensions support alterna-
tive names, in alternative formats, for a certificate subject or certificate issuer and 
can convey additional information about the certificate subject to increase a cer-
tificate user’s confidence that the certificate subject is a particular person or entity. 
For  example, information such as postal address, position within a corporation, or 
picture image may be required.
The extension fields in this area include:
 
■Subject alternative name: Contains one or more alternative names, using any 
of a variety of forms. This field is important for supporting certain applications, 
such as electronic mail, EDI, and IPSec, which may employ their own name 
forms.
 
■Issuer alternative name: Contains one or more alternative names, using any of 
a variety of forms.
 
■Subject directory attributes: Conveys any desired X.500 directory attribute 
values for the subject of this certificate.

14.5 / PUBLIC-KEY INFRASTRUCTURE 467
CERTIFICATION PATH CONSTRAINTS These extensions allow constraint specifications 
to be included in certificates issued for CAs by other CAs. The constraints may 
 restrict the types of certificates that can be issued by the subject CA or that may 
occur subsequently in a certification chain.
The extension fields in this area include:
 
■Basic constraints: Indicates if the subject may act as a CA. If so, a certification 
path length constraint may be specified.
 
■Name constraints: Indicates a name space within which all subject names in 
subsequent certificates in a certification path must be located.
 
■Policy constraints: Specifies constraints that may require explicit certifi-
cate policy identification or inhibit policy mapping for the remainder of the 
 certification path.
 14.5 PUBLIC-KEY INFRASTRUCTURE
RFC 4949 (Internet Security Glossary) defines public-key infrastructure (PKI) as 
the set of hardware, software, people, policies, and procedures needed to  create, 
manage, store, distribute, and revoke digital certificates based on asymmetric 
 cryptography. The principal objective for developing a PKI is to enable secure, 
convenient, and efficient acquisition of public keys. The Internet Engineering Task 
Force (IETF) Public Key Infrastructure X.509 (PKIX) working group has been the 
 driving force behind setting up a formal (and generic) model based on X.509 that is 
suitable for deploying a certificate-based architecture on the Internet. This section 
describes the PKIX model.
Figure 14.17 shows the interrelationship among the key elements of the PKIX 
model. These elements are
 
■End entity: A generic term used to denote end users, devices (e.g., servers, 
routers), or any other entity that can be identified in the subject field of a 
 public-key certificate. End entities typically consume and/or support PKI-
related services.
 
■Certification authority (CA): The issuer of certificates and (usually) certifi-
cate revocation lists (CRLs). It may also support a variety of administrative 
functions, although these are often delegated to one or more Registration 
Authorities.
 
■Registration authority (RA): An optional component that can assume a num-
ber of administrative functions from the CA. The RA is often associated with 
the end entity registration process but can assist in a number of other areas 
as well.
 
■CRL issuer: An optional component that a CA can delegate to publish CRLs.
 
■Repository: A generic term used to denote any method for storing certificates 
and CRLs so that they can be retrieved by end entities.

468  CHAPTER 14 / KEY MANAGEMENT AND DISTRIBUTION
PKIX Management Functions
PKIX identifies a number of management functions that potentially need to be 
 supported by management protocols. These are indicated in Figure 14.17 and 
 include the following:
 
■Registration: This is the process whereby a user first makes itself known to 
a CA (directly or through an RA), prior to that CA issuing a certificate or 
certificates for that user. Registration begins the process of enrolling in a PKI. 
Registration usually involves some offline or online procedure for mutual 
 authentication. Typically, the end entity is issued one or more shared secret 
keys used for subsequent authentication.
 
■Initialization: Before a client system can operate securely, it is necessary to 
install key materials that have the appropriate relationship with keys stored 
elsewhere in the infrastructure. For example, the client needs to be securely 
initialized with the public key and other assured information of the trusted 
CA(s), to be used in validating certificate paths.
 
■Certification: This is the process in which a CA issues a certificate for a user’s 
public key, returns that certificate to the user’s client system, and/or posts that 
certificate in a repository.
 
■Key pair recovery: Key pairs can be used to support digital signature creation 
and verification, encryption and decryption, or both. When a key pair is used for 
Figure 14.17 PKIX Architectural Model
End entity
Certificate/CRL retrieval
Certificate
publication
Certificate/CRL
publication
CRL
publication
Cross
certification
Certificate/CRL Repository
Certificate
authority
Registration
authority
Certificate
authority
Registration,
initialization,
certification,
key pair recovery,
key pair update
revocation request
PKI
users
PKI
management
entities
CRL issuer

14.6 / KEY TERMS, REVIEW QUESTIONS, AND PROBLEMS 469
encryption/decryption, it is important to provide a mechanism to recover the 
 necessary decryption keys when normal access to the keying material is no longer 
possible, otherwise it will not be possible to recover the encrypted data. Loss of 
access to the decryption key can result from forgotten passwords/PINs, corrupted 
disk drives, damage to hardware tokens, and so on. Key pair recovery allows end 
entities to restore their encryption/decryption key pair from an authorized key 
backup facility (typically, the CA that issued the end entity’s certificate).
 
■Key pair update: All key pairs need to be updated regularly (i.e., replaced 
with a new key pair) and new certificates issued. Update is required when the 
 certificate lifetime expires and as a result of certificate revocation.
 
■Revocation request: An authorized person advises a CA of an abnormal situ-
ation requiring certificate revocation. Reasons for revocation include private-
key compromise, change in affiliation, and name change.
 
■Cross certification: Two CAs exchange information used in establishing a 
cross-certificate. A cross-certificate is a certificate issued by one CA to another 
CA that contains a CA signature key used for issuing certificates.
PKIX Management Protocols
The PKIX working group has defines two alternative management protocols 
 between PKIX entities that support the management functions listed in the pre-
ceding subsection. RFC 2510 defines the certificate management protocols (CMP). 
Within CMP, each of the management functions is explicitly identified by specific 
protocol exchanges. CMP is designed to be a flexible protocol able to accommodate 
a variety of technical, operational, and business models.
RFC 2797 defines certificate management messages over CMS (CMC), where 
CMS refers to RFC 2630, cryptographic message syntax. CMC is built on earlier work 
and is intended to leverage existing implementations. Although all of the PKIX func-
tions are supported, the functions do not all map into specific protocol exchanges.
 14.6 KEY TERMS, REVIEW QUESTIONS, AND PROBLEMS
Key Terms 
Review Questions 
 
14.1 
Explain why man-in-the-middle attacks are ineffective on the secret key distribution 
protocol discussed in Figure 14.3.
 
14.2 
What is the major issue in end to end key distribution? How does the key hierarchy 
concept address that issue?
 
14.3 
What is a nonce?
 
14.4 
What is a key distribution center?
 
14.5 
What are two different uses of public-key cryptography related to key distribution?
end-to-end encryption
key distribution
key distribution center (KDC)
key management
man-in-the-middle attack
master key
nonce
public-key certificate
public-key directory
X.509 certificate
