1 - Introduction to Internet of Things 
This Chapter Covers 
e Definition & Characteristics of loT 
e Physical Design of IoT 
| 
@ Logical Design of IoT 
e JoT Enabling Technologies 
e IoT Levels & Deployment Templates 
MODULE 1

20 
Introduction to Internet of Things 
J) eT le 
es 
es a 
ee 
1.1. 
Introduction 
Internet of Things (IoT) comprises things that have unique identities and are connected to the 
Internet. While many existing devices, such as networked computers or 4G-enabled mobile 
phones, already have some form of unique identities and are also connected to the Internet, 
the focus on IoT is in the configuration, control and networking via the Internet of devices or 
"things" that are traditionally not associated with the Internet. These include devices such 
as thermostats, utility meters, a bluetooth-connected headset, irrigation pumps and sensors, 
or control circuits for an electric car’s engine. Internet of Things is a new revolution in the 
capabilities of the endpoints that are connected to the Internet, and is being driven by the 
advancements in capabilities (in combination with lower costs) in sensor networks, mobile 
devices, wireless communications, networking and cloud technologies. Experts forecast that 
by the year 2020 there will be a total of 50 billion devices/things connected to the Internet. 
Therefore, the major industry players are excited by the prospects of new markets for their 
products. The products include hardware and software components for loT endpoints, hubs, 
or control centers of the IoT universe. 
Data 
Information 
‘Knowledge 
e Raw and 
¢ Information is 
¢ Knowledge is 
unprocessed data 
inferred from data 
inferred from 
— 
obtained from loT 
by filtering, 
information by — 
devices/systems. 
processing 
organizing and 
categorizing, 
structuring 
condensing and 
information and is 
contextualizing 
put into action to 
data. 
achieve specific 
objectives. 
Figure 1.1: Inferring information and knowledge from data 
The scope of IoT is not limited to just connecting things (devices, appliances, machines) 
to the Internet. 
IoT allows these things to communicate and exchange data (control & 
information, that could include data associated with users) while executing meaningful 
applications towards a common user or machine goal. Data itself does not have a meaning 
until it is contextualized processed into useful information. Applications on IoT networks 
extract and create information from lower level data by filtering, processing, categorizing, 
condensing and contextualizing the data. This information obtained is then organized and 
structured to infer knowledge about the system and/or its users, its environment, and its 
operations and progress towards its objectives, allowing a smarter performance, as shown in 
Figure 1.1. For example, consider a series of raw sensor measurements ((72,45) ; (84, 56)) 
generated by a weather monitoring station, which by themselves do not have any meaning or 
context. To give meaning to the data, a context is added, which in this example can be that 
EE 
Ee ee 
eee 
Bahga & Madisetti, © 2014 

1.1 Introduction 
21 
Smart Lighting 
Smart Appliances 
Intrusion Detection 
Smoke/Gas Detectors 
Home 
Smart Parking 
Smart Roads 
Structural Health Monitoring 
Emergency Response 
ae Cities = 
. 
Weather Monitoring 
sie 
. 
Air Pollution Monitoring 
Environment 
® 
Noise Pollution Monitoring 
: 
° 
Forest Fire Detection 
Smart Grids 
Renewable Energy Systems 
Prognostics 
Inventory Management 
loT 
is id 
: 
ell 
Retail 
. 
Smart Payments 
ae 
Z 
Smart Vending Machines 
fens 
. 
Route Generation & Scheduling 
Logistics 
. 
Fleet Tracking 
Shipment Monitoring 
° 
Remote Vehicle Diagnostics 
_ Agriculture 
° 
Smart Irrigation 
esas 
: 
Green House Control 
Industry 
. 
Machine Diagnosis & Prognosis 
Indoor Air Quality Monitoring 
Health & 
Lifestyle 
‘ 
Health & Fitness Monitoring 
. 
Wearable Electronics 
Figure 1.2: Applications of loT 
each tuple in data represents the temperature and humidity measured every minute. With this 
context added we know the meaning (or information) of the measured data tuples. Further 
information is obtained by categorizing, condensing or processing 
this data. For example, 
the average temperature and humidity readings for last five minutes is obtained by averaging 
the last five data tuples. The next step is to organize the information and understand the 
relationships between pieces of information to infer knowledge which can be put into action. 
For example, an alert is raised if the average temperature in last five minutes exceeds 1 20F, 
and this alert may be conditioned on the user’s geographical position as well. 
The applications of Internet of Things span a wide range of domains including (but not 
limited to) homes, cities, environment, energy systems, retail, logistics, industry, agriculture 
and health as listed in Figure 1.2. For homes, IoT has several applications such as smart 
lighting that adapt the lighting to suit the ambient conditions, smart appliances that can be 
remotely monitored and controlled, intrusion detection systems, smart smoke detectors, etc. 
For cities, loT has applications such as smart parking systems that provide status updates on 

22 
Introduction to Internet of Things 
available slots, smart lighting that helps in saving energy, smart roads that provide information 
on driving conditions and structural health monitoring systems. For environment, [oT has 
applications such as weather monitoring, air and noise pollution, forest fire detection and 
river flood detection systems. For energy systems, IoT has applications such as including 
smart grids, grid integration of renewable energy sources and prognostic health management 
systems. For retail domain, IoT has applications such as inventory management, smart 
payments and smart vending machines. For agriculture domain, IoT has applications such 
as smart irrigation systems that help in saving water while enhancing productivity and 
green house control systems. Industrial applications of IoT include machine diagnosis and 
prognosis systems that help in predicting faults and determining the cause of faults and 
indoor air quality systems. For health and lifestyle, oT has applications such as health and 
fitness monitoring systems and wearable electronics. 
1.1.1. 
Definition & Characteristics of loT 
The Internet of Things (IoT) has been defined as [1]: 
ay 
Definition: A dynamic global network infrastructure with self-configuring capabilities 
based on standard and interoperable communication protocols where physical and virtual 
"things" have identities, physical attributes, and virtual personalities and use intelligent 
interfaces, and are seamlessly integrated into the information network, often communicate 
_ data associated with users and their environments. 
Let us examine this definition of loT further to put some of the terms into perspective. 
e Dynamic & Self-Adapting: IoT devices and systems may have the capability to 
dynamically adapt with the changing contexts and take actions based on their operating 
conditions, user’s context, or sensed environment. For example, consider a surveillance 
system comprising of a number of surveillance cameras. The surveillance cameras can 
adapt their modes (to normal or infra-red night modes) based on whether it is day or 
night. Cameras could switch from lower resolution to higher resolution modes when 
any motion is detected and alert nearby cameras to do the same. In this example, the 
surveillance system is adapting itself based on the context and changing (e.g., dynamic) 
conditions. 
e Self-Configuring: loT devices may have self-configuring capability, allowing a large 
number of devices to work together to provide certain functionality (such as weather 
monitoring). These devices have the ability configure themselves (in association with 
the IoT infrastructure), setup the networking, and fetch latest software upgrades with 
minimal manual or user intervention. 
e Interoperable Communication Protocols: IoT devices may support a number of 
interoperable communication protocols and can communicate with other devices and 
also with the infrastructure. We describe some of the commonly used communication 
protocols and models in later sections. 
e Unique Identity: Each IoT device has a unique identity and a unique identifier (such 
as an IP address or a URI). IoT systems may have intelligent interfaces which adapt 
based on the context, allow communicating with users and the environmental contexts. 
IoT device interfaces allow users to query the devices, monitor their status, and 
a 
ee 

1.2 Physical Design of loT 
23 
control them remotely, in association with the control, configuration and management 
infrastructure. 
e Integrated into Information Network: IoT devices are usually integrated into the 
information network that allows them to communicate and exchange data with other 
devices and systems. IoT devices can be dynamically discovered in the network, by 
other devices and/or the network, and have the capability to describe themselves (and 
their characteristics) to other devices or user applications. For example, a weather 
monitoring node can describe its monitoring capabilities to another connected node 
so that they can communicate and exchange data. Integration into the information 
network helps in making IoT systems “smarter” due to the collective intelligence of 
the individual devices in collaboration with the infrastructure. Thus, the data from 
a large number of connected weather monitoring IoT nodes can be aggregated and 
analyzed to predict the weather. 
1.2 
Physical Design of loT 
1.2.1. 
Things in loT 
The "Things" in IoT usually refers to IoT devices which have unique identities and can 
perform remote sensing, actuating and monitoring capabilities. loT devices can exchange 
data with other connected devices and applications (directly or indirectly), or collect data 
from other devices and process the data either locally or send the data to centralized servers 
or cloud-based application back-ends for processing the data, or perform some tasks locally 
and other tasks within the IoT infrastructure, based on temporal and space constraints (i.e., 
memory, processing capabilities, communication latencies and speeds, and deadlines). 
Figure 1.3 shows a block diagram of a typical IoT device. An IoT device may consist of 
several interfaces for connections to other devices, both wired and wireless. These include (i) 
I/O interfaces for sensors, (ii) interfaces for Internet connectivity, (i11) memory and storage 
interfaces and (iv) audio/video interfaces. An IoT device can collect various types of data 
from the on-board or attached sensors, such as temperature, humidity, light intensity. The 
sensed data can be communicated either to other devices or cloud-based servers/storage. loT 
devices can be connected to actuators that allow them to interact with other physical entities 
(including non-IoT devices and systems) in the vicinity of the device. For example, a relay 
switch connected to an IoT device can turn an appliance on/off based on the commands sent 
to the IoT device over the Internet. 
IoT devices can also be of varied types, for instance, wearable sensors, smart watches, 
LED lights, automobiles and industrial machines. Almost all IoT devices generate data in 
some form or the other which when processed by data analytics systems leads to useful 
information to guide further actions locally or remotely. For instance, sensor data generated 
by a soil moisture monitoring device in a garden, when processed can help in determining 
the optimum watering schedules. Figure 1.4 shows different types of loT devices. 
1.2.2 
loT Protocols 
Link Layer 
Link layer protocols determine how the data is physically sent over the network’s physical 
layer or medium (e.g., copper wire, coaxial cable, or a radio wave). The scope of the link 

24 
Introduction to Internet of Things 
si 
. 
= 
Processor 
Audio/Video 
\/O Interfaces 
cn 
ee 
Interfaces 
(for sensors, 
USB Host 
CPU 
HDMI 
actuators, etc.) 
3.5mm audio 
RJ45/Ethernet 
UART 
RCA video 
| 
SPI 
Memory Interfaces 
Graphics 
Storage Interfaces 
7: 
= 
SD 
NAND/NOR 
GPU 
= 
. 
E 
MMC 
CAN 
DDR1/DDR2/DDR3 
ee 
Figure 1.3: Generic block diagram of an loT Device 
layer is the local network connection to which host is attached. Hosts on the same link 
exchange data packets over the link layer using link layer protocols. Link layer determines 
how the packets are coded and signaled by the hardware device over the medium to which 
the host is attached (such as a coaxial cable). Let us now look at some link layer protocols 
which are relevant in the context of LoT. 
e 802.3 - Ethernet : IEEE 802.3 is a collection of wired Ethernet standards for the link 
layer. For example, 802.3 is the standard for 1OBASES Ethernet that uses coaxial 
cable as a shared medium, 802.3.1 is the standard for IOBASE-T Ethernet over copper 
twisted-pair connections, 802.3.j is the standard for 1OBASE-F Ethernet over fiber 
optic connections, 802.3ae is the standard for 10 Gbit/s Ethernet over fiber, and so on. 
These standards provide data rates from 10 Mb/s to 40 Gb/s and higher. The shared 
medium in Ethernet can be a coaxial cable, twisted-pair wire or an optical fiber. The 
shared medium (i.e., broadcast medium) carries the communication for all the devices 
on the network, thus data sent by one device can received by all devices subject to 
propagation conditions and transceiver capabilities. The specifications of the 802.3 
standards are available on the IEEE 802.3 working group website [2]. 
802.11 - WiFi : IEEE 802.11 
is a collection of wireless local area network (WLAN) 
communication standards, including extensive description of the link layer. 
For 
example, 802.1 1a operates in the 5 GHz band, 802.11b and 802.11g operate in the 
2.4 GHz band, 802.1 1n operates in the 2.4/5 GHz bands, 802.11ac operates in the 5 
GHz band and 802.1 lad operates in the 60 GHz band. These standards provide data 
rates from | Mb/s to upto 6.75 Gb/s. The specifications of the 802.11 standards are 
available on the IEEE 802.11 working group website [3] 
802.16 - WiMax : IEEE 802.16 is a collection of wireless broadband standards, 
including extensive descriptions for the link layer (also called WiMax). WiMax 
standards provide data rates from 1.5 Mb/s to 1 Gb/s. The recent update (802.16m) 
provides data rates of 100 Mbit/s for mobile stations and 1 Gbit/s for fixed stations. 
Bahga & Madisetti, © 2014 

1.2 Physical Design of loT 
25 
-—— 
Home 
Appliances 
_ Smartphones 
: 
& 
Computers 
Wearable 
Electronics 
Automobiles 
__ Energy 
f 
Retail 
: 
Payment 
Systems 
Printers 
Ti aati 
ug 
Industrial 
, 
Machines 
Healthcare 
i 
Systems 
: 
: 
Surveillance 
we €) 
cameras 
_ 
ie 
Figure 1.4: IoT Devices 
The specifications of the 802.11 standards are readily available on the IEEE 802.16 
working group website [4] 
e 802.15.4- LR-WPAN : IEEE 802.15.4 is a collection of standards for low-rate wireless 
personal area networks (LR-WPANS). These standards form the basis of specifications 
for high level communication protocols such as ZigBee. LR-WPAN standards provide 
data rates from 40 Kb/s 250 Kb/s. These standards provide low-cost and low-speed 
communication for power constrained devices. The specifications of the 802.15.4 
standards are available on the IEEE 802.15 working group website [5] 
2G/ 3G/ 4G - Mobile Communication : There are different generations of mobile 
communication standards including second generation (2G including GSM and CDMA), 
third generation (3G - including UMTS and CDMA2000) and fourth generation (4G - 
including LTE). IoT devices based on these standards can communicate over cellular 
Internet of Things - A Hands-On Approach 

26 
Introduction to Internet of Things 
a 
nV 
etn not ne in inne 
a 
REESE EET ee 
Application Layer 
| 
— 
| 
XMpPP 
|. 
DDS 
SS aS 
cease 
alaaladrta 
- TeansportLayer 
| 
ep 
UDP 
Network Layer 
IPv4 
IPv6 
6LOWPAN 
Link Layer 
802.3 -Ethernet 
802.16 - WiMax 
2G/3G/LTE — 
Cellular 
802.11-WiFi 
 802.15.4 — LR-WPAN 
Figure 1.5: IoT Protocols 
networks. Data rates for these standards range from 9.6 Kb/s (for 2G) to upto 100 
Mb/s (for 4G) and are available from the 3GPP websites. 
Network/Internet Layer 
The network layers are responsible for sending of IP datagrams from the source network to 
the destination network. This layer performs the host addressing and packet routing. The 
datagrams contain the source and destination addresses which are used to route them from the 
source to destination across multiple networks. Host identification is done using hierarchical 
IP addressing schemes such as IPv4 or IPv6. 
e IPv4 : Internet Protocol version 4 (IPv4) is the most deployed Internet protocol that is 
used to identify the devices on a network using a hierarchical addressing scheme. IPv4 
uses a 32-bit address scheme that allows total of 2°? or 4,294,967,296 addresses. As 
more and more devices got connected to the Internet, these addresses got exhausted 
in the year 2011. IPv4 has been succeeded by IPv6. The IP protocols establish 
connections on packet networks, but do not guarantee delivery of packets. Guaranteed 
delivery and data integrity are handled by the upper layer protocols (such as TCP). 
IPv4 is formally described in RFC 791 [6]. 
e IPv6 : Internet Protocol version 6 (IPv6) is the newest version of Internet protocol 
and successor to IPv4. IPv6 uses 128-bit address scheme that allows total of 2!28 or 
3.4 x 10°8 addresses. IPv4 is formally described in RFC 2460 [7]. 
e 6LOWPAN : 6LoWPAN (IPv6 over Low power Wireless Personal Area Networks) 
brings IP protocol to the low-power devices which have limited processing capability. 
Bahga & Madisetti, © 2014 

1.2 Physical Design of loT 
27 
6LOWPAN operates in the 2.4 GHz frequency range and provides data transfer rates 
of 250 Kb/s. 6LOWPAN works with the 802.15.4 link layer protocol and defines 
compression mechanisms for [Pv6 datagrams over IEEE 802.15.4-based networks [8]. 
Transport Layer 
The transport layer protocols provide end-to-end message transfer capability independent 
of the underlying network. The message transfer capability can be set up on connections, 
either using handshakes (as in TCP) or without handshakes/acknowledgements (as in UDP). 
The transport layer provides functions such as error control, segmentation, flow control and 
congestion control. 
e TCP : Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) is the most widely used transport layer 
protocol, that is used by web browsers (along with HTTP, HTTPS application layer 
protocols), email programs (SMTP application layer protocol) and file transfer (FTP). 
TCP is a connection oriented and stateful protocol. While IP protocol deals with 
sending packets, TCP ensures reliable transmission of packets in-order. TCP also 
provides error detection capability so that duplicate packets can be discarded and lost 
packets are retransmitted. The flow control capability of TCP ensures that rate at which 
the sender sends the data is not too high for the receiver to process. The congestion 
control capability of TCP helps in avoiding network congestion and congestion collapse 
which can lead to degradation of network performance. TCP is described in RFC 
Testo. 
e UDP: 
Unlike TCP, which requires carrying out an initial setup procedure, UDP is a 
connectionless protocol. UDP is useful for time-sensitive applications that have very 
small data units to exchange and do not want the overhead of connection setup. UDP 
is a transaction oriented and stateless protocol. UDP does not provide guaranteed 
delivery, ordering of messages and duplicate elimination. Higher levels of protocols 
can ensure reliable delivery or ensuring connections created are reliable. UDP is 
described in RFC 768 [10]. 
Application Layer 
Application layer protocols define how the applications interface with the lower layer 
protocols to send the data over the network. The application data, typically in files, is 
encoded by the application layer protocol and encapsulated in the transport layer protocol 
which provides connection or transaction oriented communication over the network. Port 
numbers are used for application addressing (for example port 80 for HTTP, port 22 for SSH, 
etc.). Application layer protocols enable process-to-process connections using ports. 
e HTTP: 
Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) is the application layer protocol that 
forms the foundation of the World Wide Web (WWW). HTTP includes commands 
such as GET, PUT, POST, DELETE, HEAD, TRACE, OPTIONS, etc. The protocol 
follows a request-response model where a client sends requests to a server using the 
HTTP commands. HTTP is a stateless protocol and each HTTP request is independent 
of the other requests. An HTTP client can be a browser or an application running 
on the client (e.g., an application running on an IoT device, a mobile application or 
other software). HTTP protocol uses Universal Resource Identifiers (URIs) to identify 
HTTP resources. HTTP is described in RFC 2616 [11]. 
e CoAP : Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP) is an application layer protocol for 

28 
Introduction to Internet of Things 
machine-to-machine (M2M) applications, meant for constrained environments with 
constrained devices and constrained networks. Like HTTP, CoAP is a web transfer 
protocol and uses a request-response model, however it runs on top of UDP instead of 
TCP. CoAP uses a client-server architecture where clients communicate with servers 
using connectionless datagrams. CoAP is designed to easily interface with HTTP. 
Like HTTP, CoAP supports methods such as GET, PUT, POST, and DELETE. CoAP 
draft specifications are available on IEFT Constrained environments (CoRE) Working 
Group website [12]. 
WebSocket : WebSocket protocol allows full-duplex communication over a single 
socket connection for sending messages between client and server. WebSocket is based 
on TCP and allows streams of messages to be sent back and forth between the client 
and server while keeping the TCP connection open. The client can be a browser, a 
mobile application or an IoT device. WebSocket is described in RFC 6455 [13]. 
MQTT : Message Queue Telemetry Transport (MQTT) is a light-weight messaging 
protocol based on the publish-subscribe model. MQTT uses a client-server architecture 
where the client (such as an IoT device) connects to the server (also called MQTT 
Broker) and publishes messages to topics on the server. The broker forwards the 
messages to the clients subscribed to topics. MQTT is well suited for constrained 
environments where the devices have limited processing and memory resources 
and the network bandwidth is low. MQTT specifications are available on IBM 
developerWorks [14]. 
XMPP : Extensible Messaging and Presence Protocol (XMPP) is a protocol for 
real-time communication and streaming XML data between network entities. XMPP 
powers wide range of applications including messaging, presence, data syndication, 
gaming, multi-party chat and voice/video calls. XMPP allows sending small chunks 
of XML data from one network entity to another in near real-time. XMPP is a 
decentralized protocol and uses a client-server architecture. XMPP supports both 
client-to-server and server-to-server communication paths. In the context of IoT, 
XMPP allows real-time communication between IoT devices. XMPP is described in 
RFC 6120 [15]. 
DDS : Data Distribution Service (DDS) is a data-centric middleware standard for 
device-to-device or machine-to-machine communication. DDS uses a publish-subscribe 
model where publishers (e.g. devices that generate data) create topics to which 
subscribers (e.g., devices that want to consume data) can subscribe. Publisher is an 
object responsible for data distribution and the subscriber is responsible for receiving 
published data. DDS provides quality-of-service (QoS) control and configurable 
reliability. DDS is described in Object Management Group (OMG) DDS specification [16]. 
AMQP : Advanced Message Queuing Protocol (AMQP) is an open application 
layer protocol for business messaging. AMQP supports both point-to-point and 
publisher/subscriber models, routing and queuing. AMQP brokers receive messages 
from publishers (e.g., devices or applications that generate data) and route them over 
connections to consumers (applications that process data). Publishers publish the 
messages to exchanges which then distribute message copies to queues, Messages are 
either delivered by the broker to the consumers which have subscribed to the queues or 
the consumers can pull the messages from the queues. AMQP specification is available 
Bahga & Madisetti, © 2014 

1.3 Logical Design of loT 
29 
on the AMQP working group website [17]. 
1.3 
Logical Design of loT 
Logical design of an IoT system refers to an abstract representation of the entities and 
processes without going into the low-level specifics of the implementation. In this section we 
describe the functional blocks of an IoT system and the communication APIs that are used 
for the examples in this book. The steps in logical design are described in additional detail in 
Chapter-5. 
1.3.1. 
loT Functional Blocks 
An IoT system comprises of a number of functional blocks that provide the system the 
capabilities for identification, sensing, actuation, communication, and management as shown 
in Figure 1.6. These functional blocks are described as follows: 
e Device: An IoT system comprises of devices that provide sensing, actuation, monitoring 
and control functions. You learned about IoT devices in section 1.2. 
e Communication : The communication block handles the communication for the IoT 
system. You learned about various protocols used for communication by IoT systems 
in section 1.2. 
e Services : An IoT system uses various types of IoT services such as services for device 
monitoring, device control services, data publishing services and services for device 
discovery. 
e Management : Management functional block provides various functions to govern 
the IoT system. 
e Security Security functional block secures the IoT system and by providing functions 
such as authentication, authorization, message and content integrity, and data security. 
e Application : IoT applications provide an interface that the users can use to control 
and monitor various aspects of the loT system. Applications also allow users to view 
the system status and view or analyze the processed data. 
? 
Application 
Services 
Communication 
— 
Figure 1.6: Functional Blocks of loT 

30 
Sande 
Request 
requests to 
Introduction to Internet of Things 
Receives requests 
| 
_ 
from client, 
processes 
1.3.2 
requests, looks 
up/fetches 
"resources, 
prepares 
- 
response and 
sends response 
 toclient 
server 
Response 
| _— 
Topic-1 
Subscribers: 
Consumer-1, 
Consumer-2 
Message published 
to Topic-1 
Sends 
messages to 
topics 
Topic-2 
Subscribers: 
Consumer-3 
Message published 
to Topic-2 
Figure 1.8: Publish-Subscribe communication model 
Sends 
messages to 
queue 
“Consumer 
Messages pushed 
to queues 
Messages pulled 
from queues 
“Consumer-2_ 
Figure 1.9: Push-Pull communication model 
loT Communication Models 
e Request-Response : Request-Response is a communication model in which the 
client sends requests to the server and the server responds to the requests. When 
the server receives a request, it decides how to respond, fetches the data, retrieves 
ee 
Bahga & Madisetti, © 2014 
oh
fhe 

1.3 Logical Design of loT 
31 
Request to setup Connection 
Response accepting the request 
| 
Message from Client to Server 
Message from Server to Client 
Connection close request 
Connection close response 
Figure 1.10: Exclusive Pair communication model 
resource representations, prepares the response, and then sends the response to 
the client. Request-Response model is a stateless communication model and each 
request-response pair is independent of others. Figure 1.7 shows the client-server 
interactions in the request-response model. 
e Publish-Subscribe : Publish-Subscribe is a communication model that involves 
publishers, brokers and consumers. Publishers are the source of data. Publishers 
send the data to the topics which are managed by the broker. Publishers are not aware 
of the consumers. Consumers subscribe to the topics which are managed by the broker. 
When the broker receives data for a topic from the publisher, it sends the data to all the 
subscribed consumers. Figure 1.8 shows the publisher-broker-consumer interactions 
in the publish-subscribe model. 
e Push-Pull : Push-Pull is a communication model in which the data producers push the 
data to queues and the consumers pull the data from the queues. Producers do not need 
to be aware of the consumers. Queues help in decoupling the messaging between the 
producers and consumers. Queues also act as a buffer which helps in situations when 
there is a mismatch between the rate at which the producers push data and the rate 
rate at which the consumers pull data. Figure |.9 shows the publisher-queue-consumer 
interactions in the push-pull model. 
e Exclusive Pair : Exclusive Pair is a bi-directional, fully duplex communication model 
that uses a persistent connection between the client and server. Once the connection is 
setup it remains open until the client sends a request to close the connection. Client 
and server can send messages to each other after connection setup. Exclusive pair is 
a stateful communication model and the server is aware of all the open connections. 
Figure 1.10 shows the client-server interactions in the exclusive pair model. 

32 
Introduction to Internet of Things 
1.3.3. 
loT Communication APIs 
In the previous section you learned about various communication models. In this section you 
will learn about two specific communication APIs which are used in the examples in this 
book. 
REST-based Communication APIs 
Representational State Transfer (REST) [88] is a set of architectural principles by which 
you can design web services and web APIs that focus on a system’s resources and how 
resource states are addressed and transferred. REST APIs follow the request-response 
communication model described in previous section. The REST architectural constraints 
apply to the components, connectors, and data elements, within a distributed hypermedia 
system. The REST architectural constraints are as follows: 
| 
E 
— 
- 
| HTTP Client 
HTTP Packet 
HTTP Server 
| 
[ HTTP.Command 
=| 
| 
REST- 
| GET 
PUT. 
Authorization 
Sa 
Ls a post. <2 ever 
| wroraa 
| 
HTTP Client 
* 
| 
| 
J 
REST-ful Web 
| 
| RESTPayload 
Service 
| | 
: 
JSON 
XML 
| 
| 
2 
| eee 
| 
r 
| 
Resources 
i [ 
URI 
| [ 
URI 
SPR ICI 
TSE 
AEE HL 
3 (Sees ———} 
Representations I | 
/ 
eas 
Figure 1.11: Communication with REST APIs 
e Client-Server: The principle behind the client-server constraint is the separation of 
concerns. For example, clients should not be concerned with the storage of data which 
is a concern of the server. Similarly, the server should not be concerned about the user 
interface, which is a concern of the client. Separation allows client and server to be 
independently developed and updated. 
e Stateless: Each request from client to server must contain all the information necessary 
to understand the request, and cannot take advantage of any stored context on the 
server. The session state is kept entirely on the client. 
e Cache-able: Cache constraint requires that the data within a response to a request 
be implicitly or explicitly labeled as cache-able or non-cache-able. If a response is 
cache-abie, then a client cache is given the right to reuse that response data for later, 
equivalent requests. Caching can partially or completely eliminate some interactions 
and improve efficiency and scalability. 
Bahga & Madisetti, © 2014 

1.3 Logical Design of loT 
33 
eT 
REST 
Client 
— 
s Server _ 
Request (GET, PUT, UPDATE or DELETE) 
( 
with payload (JSON or XML) 
Response (JSON or XML) 
Request (GET, PUT, UPDATE or DELETE) 
with payload (JSON or XML) 
Response (JSON or XML) 
Figure 1.12: Request-response model used by REST 
Layered System: Layered system constraint, constrains the behavior of components 
such that each component cannot see beyond the immediate layer with which they are 
interacting. For example, a client cannot tell whether it is connected directly to the end 
server, or to an intermediary along the way. System scalability can be improved by 
allowing intermediaries to respond to requests instead of the end server, without the 
client having to do anything different. 
Uniform Interface: Uniform Interface constraint requires that the method of 
communication between a client and a server must be uniform. Resources are identified 
in the requests (by URIs in web based systems) and are themselves separate from the 
representations of the resources that are returned to the client. When a client holds 
a representation of a resource it has all the information required to update or delete 
the resource (provided the client has required permissions). Each message includes 
enough information to describe how to process the message. 
Code on demand: Servers can provide executable code or scripts for clients to execute 
in their context. This constraint is the only one that is optional. 
A RESTful web service is a "web API" implemented using HTTP and REST principles. 
Figure 1.11 shows the communication between client and server using REST APIs. Figure 1.12 
_shows the interactions in the request-response model used by REST. RESTful web service 
is a collection of resources which are represented by URIs. RESTful web API has a base 
URI (e.g. http://example.com/api/tasks/). The clients send requests to these URIs using the 
methods defined by the HTTP protocol (e.g., GET, PUT, POST, or DELETE), as shown in 
Table 1.1. 
A RESTful web service can support various Internet media types (JSON being the 
most popular media type for RESTful web services). IP for Smart Objects Alliance (IPSO 
Alliance) has published an Application Framework that defines a RESTful design for use in 

34 
Introduction to Internet of Things 
List 
all 
the | iittp-//example.com/api/tasks/ 
GET 
Collection URI | resources 
In 
a | (ict ai tasks) 
collection 
Get information | http://example.com/api/tasks/1/ 
GET 
Element URI 
about a resource | (get information on task-1) 
http://example.com/api/tasks/ 
POST 
Collection URI 
Creaty 
a. 
New 
(create a new task from data 
pee 
provided in the request) 
Generally 
not 
used 
Replace 
the http://example.com/api/tasks/ 
entire collection 
PUT 
Collection URI 
; 
(replace entire collection with 
ee 
ae provided in the request) 
POST 
Element URI 
collection 
http://example.com/api/tasks/1/ 
PUT 
Element URI 
Update 
. 
(update 
task-1 
with 
data 
resource 
provided in the request) 
i 
http://example.com/api/tasks/ 
DELETE | colestonRE 
P 
P 
collection 
(delete all tasks) 
http://example.com/api/tasks/1/ 
DELETE “| Element URT | eee 
aii 
P 
P 
L 
resource 
| 
(delete task-1) 
Table 1.1: HTTP request methods and actions 
IP smart object systems [18]. 
WebSocket-based Communication APIs 
WebSocket APIs allow bi-directional, full duplex communication between clients and servers. 
WebSocket APIs follow the exclusive pair communication model described in previous 
section and as shown in Figure 1.13. Unlike request-response APIs such as REST, the 
WebSocket APIs allow full duplex communication and do not require a new connection to 
be setup for each message to be sent. WebSocket communication begins with a connection 
setup request sent by the client to the server. This request (called a WebSocket handshake) 
is sent over HTTP and the server interprets it as an upgrade request. If the server supports 
WebSocket protocol, the server responds to the WebSocket handshake response. After the 
connection is setup, the client and server can send data/messages to each other in full-duplex 
mode. WebSocket APIs reduce the network traffic and latency as there is no overhead for 
connection setup and termination requests for each message. WebSocket is suitable for loT 
applications that have low latency or high throughput requirements. 
Se a 
ee 
ae 
Te 
cae 
Bahga & Madisetti, © 2014 

1.4 loT Enabling Technologies 
35 
WebSocket Protocol 
Client 
Request to setup WebSocket Connection 
: 
Initial Handshake 
Response accepting the request 
: 
(over HTTP) 
Data frame 
Data frame 
Bidirectional Communication 
j 
Data frame 
(over persistent 
Ca, 
AILS IT ee EE GEL Se 
WebSocket connection) 
: 
Data frame 
Connection close request 
Connection close response 
} Bene aoe e 
Figure 1.13: Exclusive pair model used by WebSocket APIs 
1.4 
loT Enabling Technologies 
IoT is enabled by several technologies including wireless sensor networks, cloud computing, 
big data analytics, embedded systems, security protocols and architectures, communication 
protocols, web services, mobile Internet, and semantic search engines. This section provides 
an overview of some of these technologies which play a key-role in I[oT. 
1.4.1. 
Wireless Sensor Networks 
A Wireless Sensor Network (WSN) comprises of distributed devices with sensors which are 
used to monitor the environmental and physical conditions. 
A WSN consist of a number 
of end-nodes and routers and a coordinator. End nodes have several sensors attached to 
them. End nodes can also act as routers. Routers are responsible for routing the data packets 
from end-nodes to the coordinator. The coordinator collects the data from all the nodes. 
Coordinator also acts as a gateway that connects the WSN to the Internet. Some examples of 
WSNs used in IoT systems are described as follows: 
e Weather monitoring systems use WSNs in which the nodes collect temperature, 
humidity and other data, which is aggregated and analyzed. 
e Indoor air quality monitoring systems use WSNs to collect data on the indoor air 
quality and concentration of various gases. 
e Soil moisture monitoring systems use WSNs to monitor soil moisture at various 
locations. 
e Surveillance systems use WSNs for collecting surveillance data (such as motion 
detection data) 
e Smart grids use WSNs for monitoring the grid at various points. 

36 
Introduction to Internet of Things 
IN a 
ne 
ee ee 
ee 
e Structural health monitoring systems use WSNs to monitor the health of structures 
(buildings, bridges) by collecting vibration data from sensor nodes deployed at various 
points in the structure. 
WSNs are enabled by wireless communication protocols such as IEEE 802.15.4. ZigBee 
is one of the most popular wireless technologies used by WSNs. ZigBee specifications are 
based on IEEE 802.15.4. ZigBee operates at 2.4 GHz frequency and offers data rates upto 
250 KB/s and range from 10 to 100 meters depending onthe power output and environmental 
conditions. The power of WSNs lies in their ability to deploy large number of low-cost 
and low-power sensing nodes for continuous monitoring of environmental and physical 
conditions. WSNs are self-organizing networks. Since WSNs have large number of nodes, 
manual configuration for each node is not possible. The self-organizing capability of WSN 
makes the network robust. In the event of failure of some nodes or addition of new nodes to 
the network, the network can reconfigure itself. 
1.4.2 
Cloud Computing 
Cloud computing is a transformative computing paradigm that involves delivering applications 
and services over the Internet. 
Cloud computing involves provisioning of computing, 
networking and storage resources on demand and providing these resources as metered 
services to the users, in a "pay as you go" model. Cloud computing resources can be 
provisioned on-demand by the users, without requiring interactions with the cloud service 
provider. The process of provisioning resources is automated. Cloud computing resources 
can be accessed over the network using standard access mechanisms that provide 
platform-independent access through the use of heterogeneous client platforms such as 
workstations, laptops, tablets and smart-phones. The computing and storage resources 
provided by cloud service providers are pooled to serve multiple users using multi-tenancy. 
Multi-tenant aspects of the cloud allow multiple users to be served by the same physical 
hardware. Users are assigned virtual resources that run on top of the physical resources. 
Cloud computing services are offered to users in different forms (see the authors’ 
companion book on Cloud Computing, for instance): 
e Infrastructure-as-a-Service (IaaS) : IaaS provides the users the ability to provision 
computing and storage resources. These resources are provided to the users as virtual 
machine instances and virtual storage. Users can start, stop, configure and manage the 
virtual machine instances and virtual storage. Users can deploy operating systems and 
applications of their choice on the virtual resources provisioned in the cloud. The cloud 
service provider manages the underlying infrastructure. Virtual resources provisioned 
by the users are billed based on a pay-per-use paradigm. 
e Platform-as-a-Service (PaaS) : PaaS provides the users the ability to develop and 
deploy application in the cloud using the development tools, application programming 
interfaces (APIs), software libraries and services provided by the cloud service 
provider. The cloud service provider manages the underlying cloud infrastructure 
including servers, network, operating systems and storage. The users, themselves, are 
responsible for developing, deploying, configuring and managing applications on the 
cloud infrastructure. 
e Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) : SaaS provides the users a complete software application 
or the user interface to the application itself. The cloud service provider manages 
Bahga & Madisetti, © 2014 

1.4 loT Enabling Technologies 
37 
the underlying cloud infrastructure including servers, network, operating systems, 
Storage and application software, and the user is unaware of the underlying architecture 
of the cloud. Applications are provided to the user through a thin client interface 
(e.g., a browser), SaaS applications are platform independent and can be accessed 
from various client devices such as workstations, laptop, tablets and smart-phones, 
running different operating systems. Since the cloud service provider manages both 
the application and data, the users are able to access the applications from anywhere. 
1.4.3 
Big Data Analytics 
Big data is defined as collections of data sets whose volume, velocity (in terms of its temporal 
variation), or variety, is so large that it is difficult to store, manage, process and analyze 
the data using traditional databases and data processing tools. Big data analytics involves 
several steps starting from data cleansing, data munging (or wrangling), data processing and 
visualization. Some examples of big data generated by IoT systems are described as follows: 
e Sensor data generated by IoT systems such as weather monitoring stations. 
e Machine sensor data collected from sensors embedded in industrial and energy systems 
for monitoring their health and detecting failures. 
e Health and fitness data generated by IoT devices such as wearable fitness bands. 
e Data generated by IoT systems for location and tracking of vehicles. 
e Data generated by retail inventory monitoring systems. 
The underlying characteristics of big data include: 
e Volume: Though there is no fixed threshold for the volume of data to be considered 
as big data, however, typically, the term big data is used for massive scale data that is 
difficult to store, manage and process using traditional databases and data processing 
architectures. The volumes of data generated by modern IT, industrial, and health-care 
systems, for example, is growing exponentially driven by the lowering costs of data 
storage and processing architectures and the need to extract valuable insights from the 
data to improve business processes, efficiency and service to consumers. 
e Velocity: 
Velocity is another important characteristic of big data and the primary 
reason for exponential growth of data. Velocity of data refers to how fast the data is 
generated and how frequently it varies. Modern IT, industrial and other systems are 
generating data at increasingly higher speeds. 
e Variety: 
Variety refers to the forms of the data. Big data comes in different forms 
such as structured or unstructured data, including text data, image, audio, video and 
sensor data. 
1.4.4 
Communication Protocols 
Communication protocols form the backbone of IoT systems and enable network connectivity 
and coupling to applications. Communication protocols allow devices to exchange data 
over the network. In section 1.2.2 you learned about various link, network, transport and 
application layer protocols. These protocols define the data exchange formats, data encoding, 
addressing schemes for devices and routing of packets from source to destination. Other 
functions of the protocols include sequence control (that helps in ordering packets determining 
lost packets), flow control (that helps in controlling the rate at which the sender is sending 

38 
Introduction to Internet of Things 
the data so that the receiver or the network is not overwhelmed) and retransmission of lost 
packets. 
1.4.5 
Embedded Systems 
An Embedded System is a computer system that has computer hardware and software 
embedded to perform specific tasks. In contrast to general purpose computers or personal 
computers (PCs) which can perform various types of tasks, embedded systems are designed 
to perform a specific set of tasks. 
Key components of an embedded system include, 
microprocessor or microcontroller, memory (RAM, ROM, cache), networking units (Ethernet, 
WiFi adapters), input/output units (display, keyboard, etc.) and storage (such as flash 
memory). Some embedded systems have specialized processors such as digital signal 
processors (DSPs), graphics processors and application specific processors. Embedded 
systems run embedded operating systems such as real-time operating systems (RTOS). 
Embedded systems range from low-cost miniaturized devices such as digital watches to 
devices such as digital cameras, point of sale terminals, vending machines, appliances (such 
as washing machines), etc. In the next chapter we describe how such devices form an integral 
part of IoT systems. 
1.5 
loT Levels & Deployment Templates 
In this section we define various levels of IoT systems with increasing completely. An loT 
system comprises of the following components: 
e Device: An IoT device allows identification, remote sensing, actuating and remote 
monitoring capabilities. You learned about various examples of IoT devices in section 
oe4 IF 
e Resource: Resources are software components on the IoT device for accessing, 
processing, and storing sensor information, or controlling actuators connected to 
the device. Resources also include the software components that enable network 
access for the device. 
e Controller Service: Controller service is a native service that runs on the device 
and interacts with the web services. Controller service sends data from the device to 
the web service and receives commands from the application (via web services) for 
controlling the device. 
e Database: Database can be either local or in the cloud and stores the data generated 
by the IoT device. 
e Web Service: Web services serve as a link between the IoT device, application, 
database and analysis components. Web service can be either implemented using 
HTTP and REST principles (REST service) or using WebSocket protocol (WebSocket 
service). 
A comparison of REST and WebSocket is provided below: 
— Stateless/Stateful: REST services are stateless in nature. Each request contains 
all the information needed to process it. Requests are independent of each other. 
WebSocket on the other hand is stateful in nature where the server maintains the 
state and is aware of all the open connections. 
- Uni-directional/Bi-directional: REST services operate over HTTP and are 
uni-directional. Request is always sent by a client and the server responds to the 
Bahga & Madisetti, © 2014 

1.5 loT Levels & Deployment Templates 
39 
requests. On the other hand, WebSocket is a bi-directional protocol and allows 
both client and server to send messages to each other. 
— Request-Response/Full Duplex: REST services follow a request-response 
communication model where the client sends requests and the server responds 
to the requests. WebSocket on the other hand allow full-duplex communication 
between the client and server, i.e., both client and server can send messages to 
each other independently. 
- TCP Connections: For REST services, each HTTP request involves setting up 
a new TCP connection. WebSocket on the other hand involves a single TCP 
connection over which the client and server communicate in a full-duplex mode. 
— Header Overhead: REST services operate over HTTP, and each request is 
independent of others. Thus each request carries HTTP headers which is an 
overhead. Due the overhead of HTTP headers, REST is not suitable for real-time 
applications. WebSocket on the other hand does not involve overhead of headers. 
After the initial handshake (that happens over HTTP), the client and server 
exchange messages with minimal frame information. Thus WebSocket is suitable 
for real-time applications. 
-— Scalability: Scalability is easier in the case of REST services as requests are 
independent and no state information needs to be maintained by the server. 
Thus both horizontal (scaling-out) and vertical scaling (scaling-up) solutions 
are possible for REST services. For WebSockets, horizontal scaling can be 
cumbersome due to the stateful nature of the communication. Since the server 
maintains the state of a connection, vertical scaling is easier for WebSockets than 
horizontal scaling. 
e Analysis Component: The Analysis Component is responsible for analyzing the IoT 
data and generate results in a form which are easy for the user to understand. Analysis 
of IoT data can be performed either locally or in the cloud. Analyzed results are stored 
in the local or cloud databases. 
e Application: IoT applications provide an interface that the users can use to control 
and monitor various aspects of the IoT system. Applications also allow users to view 
the system status and view the processed data. 
1.5.1 
loT Level-1 
A level-1 IoT system has a single node/device that performs sensing and/or actuation, stores 
data, performs analysis and hosts the application as shown in Figure 1.14. Level-1 IoT 
systems are suitable for modeling low-cost and low-complexity solutions where the data 
involved is not big and the analysis requirements are not computationally intensive. 
Let us now consider an example of a level-1 IoT system for home automation. The 
system consists of a single node that allows controlling the lights and appliances in a home 
remotely. The device used in this system interfaces with the lights and appliances using 
electronic relay switches. The status information of each light or appliance is maintained in a 
local database. REST services deployed locally allow retrieving and updating the state of 
each light or appliance in the status database. The controller service continuously monitors 
the state of each light or appliance (by retrieving state from the database) and triggers the 
relay switches accordingly. The application which is deployed locally has a user interface 

40 
Introduction to Internet of Things 
for controlling the lights or appliances. Since the device is connected to the Internet, the 
application can be accessed remotely as well. 
loT Level-1 
Local 
Cloud 
oe 
REST/WebSocket 
Communication 
REST/WebSocket 
Services 
eae 
y 
Resource 
| 
4 
Device 
| 
Monitoring Node 
performs analysis, stores data 
Figure 1.14: loT Level-1 
1.5.2 
loT Level-2 
A level-2 loT system has a single node that performs sensing and/or actuation and local 
analysis as shown in Figure 1.15. Data is stored in the cloud and application is usually 
cloud-based. Level-2 IoT systems are suitable for solutions where the data involved is big, 
however, the primary analysis requirement is not computationally intensive and can be done 
locally itself. 
Let us consider an example of a level-2 IoT system for smart irrigation. The system 
consists of a single node that monitors the soil moisture level and controls the irrigation 
system. The device used in this system collects soil moisture data from sensors. 
The 
controller service continuously monitors the moisture levels. If the moisture level drops 
below a threshold, the irrigation system is turned on. For controlling the irrigation system 
actuators such as solenoid valves can be used. The controller also sends the moisture data to 
the computing cloud. A cloud-based REST web service is used for storing and retrieving 
Bahga & Madisetti, © 2014 

1.5 loT Levels & Deployment Templates 
41 
moisture data which is stored in the cloud database. A cloud-based application is used for 
visualizing the moisture levels over a period of time, which can help in making decisions 
about irrigation schedules. 
loT Level-2 
Local 
, 
Cloud 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
REST/WebSocket 
ake 
REST/WebSocket 
COME aay, 
Communication 
REST/WebSocket 
3 
Services 
| 
t 
| 
Resource 
| 
ee 
“4 
| 
| 
Device 
| 
| 
as 
paaews 
= 
— ea 
Monitoring Node 
performs analysis 
Cloud Storage 
Figure 1.15: IoT Level-2 
1.5.3 
loT Level-3 
A level-3 IoT system has a single node. Data is stored and analyzed in the cloud and 
application is cloud-based as shown in Figure 1.16. Level-3 IoT systems are suitable for 
solutions where the data involved is big and the analysis requirements are computationally 
intensive. 
Let us consider an example of a level-2 IoT system for tracking package handling. The 
system consists of a single node (for a package) that monitors the vibration levels for a 
package being shipped. The device in this system uses accelerometer and gyroscope sensors 
for monitoring vibration levels. The controller service sends the sensor data to the cloud 
in real-time using a WebSocket service. The data is stored in the cloud and also visualized 
using a cloud-based application. The analysis components in the cloud can trigger alerts if 
the vibration levels become greater than a threshold. The benefit of using WebSocket service 

42 
Introduction to Internet of Things 
i a 
a a METRE i ty belle ace no aS ae 
instead of REST service in this example is that, the sensor data can be sent in real time to the 
cloud. Moreover, cloud based applications can subscribe to the sensor data feeds for viewing 
the real-time data. 
loT Level-3 
Cloud 
Local 
| 
REST/WebSocket 
REST/WebSocket 
Communication 
Communication 
REST/WebSocket 
Communication 
oe 
| 
| 
y 
| 
Resource 
| 
) 
: 
: 
| 
Device 
Monitoring Node 
Cloud Storage & Analysis 
Figure 1.16: IoT Level-3 
1.5.4 
loT Level-4 
A level-4 IoT system has multiple nodes that perform local analysis. Data is stored in the 
cloud and application is cloud-based as shown in Figure 1.17. Level-4 contains local and 
cloud-based observer nodes which can subscribe to and receive information collected in 
the cloud from IoT devices. Observer nodes can process information and use it for various 
applications, however, observer nodes do not perform any control functions. Level-4 IloT 
systems are suitable for solutions where multiple nodes are required, the data involved is big 
and the analysis requirements are computationally intensive. 
Let us consider an example of a level-4 IoT system for noise monitoring. The system 
consists of multiple nodes placed in different locations for monitoring noise levels in an area. 
The nodes in this example are equipped with sound sensors. Nodes are independent of each 
Bahga & Madisetti, © 2014 

1.5 loT Levels & Deployment Templates 
43 
other. Each node runs its own controller service that sends the data to the cloud. The data is 
stored in a cloud database. The analysis of data collected from a number of nodes is done in 
the cloud. A cloud-based application is used for visualizing the aggregated data. 
loT Level-4 
Cloud 
Local 
| 
| 
| 
| 
—>=. 
Observers 
Observer 
Nod 
Node 
nee 
| 
REST/WebSocket 
l 
at 
Communication 
3 | 
Ne 
os 
Analytics 
REST Services = 
<—> 
Component 
My 
t 
cman 
(loT Intelligence) 
eee 
= 
Resource 
Resource 
SG 
7 - 
; 
i 
“Dotabose 
Device 
Device. 
Monitoring Nodes 
perform local analysis _ 
f 
ney 
Cloud Storage 
Figure 1.17: loT Level-4 
1.5.5 
loT Level-5 
A level-5 IoT system has multiple end nodes and one coordinator node as shown in 
Figure 1.18. The end nodes that perform sensing and/or actuation. 
Coordinator node 
collects data from the end nodes and sends to the cloud. Data is stored and analyzed in the 
cloud and application is cloud-based. Level-5 IoT systems are suitable for solutions based on 
wireless sensor networks, in which the data involved is big and the analysis requirements are 
computationally intensive. 
Let us consider an example of a level-5 IoT system for forest fire detection. The system 
consists of multiple nodes placed in different locations for monitoring temperature, humidity 
and carbon dioxide (COz2) levels in a forest. The end nodes in this example are equipped with 
various sensors (such as temperature, humidity and 
CO2). The coordinator node collects the 
data from the end nodes and acts as a gateway that provides Internet connectivity to the loT 
system. The controller service on the coordinator device sends the collected data to the cloud. 
The data is stored in a cloud database. The analysis of data is done in the computing cloud to 
aggregate the data and make predictions. A cloud-based application is used for visualizing 
the data. 

44 
Introduction to Internet of Things 
ha 
I 
SO 
St ehecxey, sey Se et 
es os 
loT Level-5 
Local 
Observer 
Node 
Observer 
App 
Node 
\ 
REST/WebSocket 
Communication 
Analytics 
Controller 
— 
odie: es 
Component 
Service. 
} 
Ad 
(loT Intelligence) 
| 
t 
Resource 
Resource 
. 
<a eS 
i 
i 
i 
| 
| Database 
| 
| 
ey eee a 
Endpoint 
Endpoint 
Coordinator 
| 
Device 
Device 
Device 
| 
> 
Routers/End Points 
ee 
“Coordinator 
Cloud Storage & 
Analysis 
| 
Figure 1.18: loT Level-5 
1.5.6 
loT Level-6 
A level-6 IoT system has multiple independent end nodes that perform sensing and/or 
actuation and send data to the cloud. Data is stored in the cloud and application is cloud-based 
as shown in Figure 1.19. The analytics component analyzes the data and stores the results 
in the cloud database. The results are visualized with the cloud-based application. The 
centralized controller is aware of the status of all the end nodes and sends control commands 
to the nodes. 
Let us consider an example of a level-6 IoT system for weather monitoring. The system 
consists of multiple nodes placed in different locations for monitoring temperature, humidity 
and pressure in an area. The end nodes are equipped with various sensors (such as temperature, 
pressure and humidity). The end nodes send the data to the cloud in real-time using a 
WebSocket service. The data is stored in a cloud database. The analysis of data is done in 
the cloud to aggregate the data and make predictions. A cloud-based application is used for 
visualizing the data. 
Summary 
Internet of Things (loT) refers to physical and virtual objects that have unique identities 
and are connected to the Internet. This allows the development of intelligent applications 
that make energy, logistics, industrial control, retail, agriculture and many other domains 
of human endeavour "smarter". IoT allows different types of devices, appliances, users and 
Bahga & Madisetti, © 2014 

1.5 loT Levels & Deployment Templates 
45 
| 
ee 
loT Level-6 
Local 
Cloud 
Observer 
Node 
Observer 
Node 
: App 
1 
REST/WebSocket 
Communication 
: 
Centralized 
REST/WebSocket 
Analytics 
cia; ii 
Controller 
Services 
Component 
(y 
i 
| 
aj 
(JoT Intelligence) 
Resource 
Resource 
a 
t 
t 
: 
oats | 
Device 
Device 
ee 
=F Ah 
: 
us 
Multiple Monitoring Nodes 
we © 
“Centralized 
Controller 
Cloud Storage & 
Analysis 
Figure 1.19: IoT Level-6 
machines to communicate and exchange data. The applications of Internet of Things (IoT) 
span a wide range of domains including (but not limited to) homes, cities, environment, 
energy systems, retail, logistics, industry, agriculture and health. Things in IoT refers to 
IoT devices which have unique identities and allow remote sensing, actuating and remote 
monitoring capabilities. Almost all IoT devices generate data in some form or the other 
which when processed by data analytics systems leads to useful information to guide further 
actions. You learned about IoT protocols for link, network, transport and application layers. 
Link layer protocols determine how the data is physically sent over the network. The 
network/internet layers is responsible for sending of IP datagrams from the source network to 
the destination network. The transport layer protocols provides end-to-end message transfer 
capability independent of the underlying network. Application layer protocols define how the 
applications interface with the lower layer protocols to send the data over the network. You 
learned about functional blocks of an IoT system including device communication, services, 
management, security and application blocks. You learned about loT communication models 
such as request-response, publish-subscribe, push-pull and exclusive pair. You learned about 
REST-based and WebSocket-based communication APIs. REST is a set of architectural 
principles by which you can design web services and web APIs that focus on a system’s 
resources and how resource states are addressed and transferred. 
A RESTful web service 
is a web API implemented using HTTP and REST principles. WebSocket APIs allow 
bi-directional, full duplex communication between clients and servers. You learned about 
enabling technologies of IoT such as wireless sensor networks, cloud computing, big data 
analytics, communication protocols and embedded systems. Finally, you learned about IoT 

46 
Introduction to Internet of Things 
levels. A level-1 IoT system has a single node/device that performs sensing and/or actuation, 
stores data, performs analysis and hosts the application. A level-2 IoT system has a single 
node that performs sensing and/or actuation and local analysis. A level-3 IoT system has 
a single node. Data is stored and analyzed in the cloud and application is cloud-based. A 
level-4 IoT system has multiple nodes that perform local analysis. Data is stored in the 
cloud and application is cloud-based. A level-5 IoT system has multiple end nodes and one 
coordinator node. A level-6 IoT system has multiple independent end nodes that perform 
sensing and/or actuation and send data to the cloud. 
Review Questions 
l. 
Oo 
ONAN 
FW 
WN 
Describe an example of an IoT system in which information and knowledge are inferred 
from data. 
. Why do IoT systems have to be self-adapting and self-configuring? 
. What is the role of things and Internet in IoT? 
. What is the function of communication functional block in an loT system? 
. Describe an example of IoT service that uses publish-subscribe communication model. 
. Describe an example of IoT service that uses WebSocket-based communication. 
. What are the architectural constraints of REST? 
. What is the role of a coordinator in wireless sensor network? 
. What is the role of a controller service in an IoT system? 
